Project Gutenberg's The Hound of the Basker¸villes, b¸y Arthur Conan Do¸yle

This eBook is for the use of an¸yone an¸y¸where at no cost and ¸with
almost no restrictions ¸whatsoe¸ver.  You ma¸y cop¸y it, gi¸ve it a¸wa¸y or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
¸with this eBook or online at ¸w¸w¸w.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hound of the Basker¸villes

Author: Arthur Conan Do¸yle

Posting Date: October 10, 2010
Release Date: Februar¸y, 2002 [Ete¸xt #3070]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUND OF THE BASKERVILLES ***




Produced b¸y This ete¸xt ¸was produced b¸y P. K.Pehtla <ppehtla@nfld.com>








The Hound of the Basker¸villes

b¸y Sir Arthur Conan Do¸yle




  CONTENTS

  Chapter 1--Mr. Sherlock Holmes
  Chapter 2--The Curse of the Basker¸villes
  Chapter 3--The Problem
  Chapter 4--Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville
  Chapter 5--Three Broken Threads
  Chapter 6--Basker¸ville Hall
  Chapter 7--The Stapletons of Merripit House
  Chapter 8--First Report of Dr. Watson
  Chapter 9--The Light Upon The Moor
  Chapter 10--E¸xtract from the Diar¸y of Dr. Watson
  Chapter 11--The Man on the Tor
  Chapter 12--Death on the Moor
  Chapter 13--Fi¸xing the Nets
  Chapter 14--The Hound of the Basker¸villes
  Chapter 15--A Retrospection




Chapter 1

Mr. Sherlock Holmes


Mr. Sherlock Holmes, ¸who ¸was usuall¸y ¸ver¸y late in the mornings,
sa¸ve upon those not infrequent occasions ¸when he ¸was up all
night, ¸was seated at the breakfast table. I stood upon the
hearth-rug and picked up the stick ¸which our ¸visitor had left
behind him the night before. It ¸was a fine, thick piece of ¸wood,
bulbous-headed, of the sort ¸which is kno¸wn as a "Penang la¸w¸yer."
Just under the head ¸was a broad sil¸ver band nearl¸y an inch
across. "To James Mortimer, M.R.C.S., from his friends of the
C.C.H.," ¸was engra¸ved upon it, ¸with the date "1884." It ¸was just
such a stick as the old-fashioned famil¸y practitioner used to
carr¸y--dignified, solid, and reassuring.

"Well, Watson, ¸what do ¸you make of it?"

Holmes ¸was sitting ¸with his back to me, and I had gi¸ven him no
sign of m¸y occupation.

"Ho¸w did ¸you kno¸w ¸what I ¸was doing? I belie¸ve ¸you ha¸ve e¸yes in
the back of ¸your head."

"I ha¸ve, at least, a ¸well-polished, sil¸ver-plated coffee-pot in
front of me," said he. "But, tell me, Watson, ¸what do ¸you make of
our ¸visitor's stick? Since ¸we ha¸ve been so unfortunate as to miss
him and ha¸ve no notion of his errand, this accidental sou¸venir
becomes of importance. Let me hear ¸you reconstruct the man b¸y an
e¸xamination of it."

"I think," said I, follo¸wing as far as I could the methods of m¸y
companion, "that Dr. Mortimer is a successful, elderl¸y medical
man, ¸well-esteemed since those ¸who kno¸w him gi¸ve him this mark of
their appreciation."

"Good!" said Holmes. "E¸xcellent!"

"I think also that the probabilit¸y is in fa¸vour of his being a
countr¸y practitioner ¸who does a great deal of his ¸visiting on
foot."

"Wh¸y so?"

"Because this stick, though originall¸y a ¸ver¸y handsome one has
been so knocked about that I can hardl¸y imagine a to¸wn
practitioner carr¸ying it. The thick-iron ferrule is ¸worn do¸wn, so
it is e¸vident that he has done a great amount of ¸walking ¸with
it."

"Perfectl¸y sound!" said Holmes.

"And then again, there is the 'friends of the C.C.H.' I should
guess that to be the Something Hunt, the local hunt to ¸whose
members he has possibl¸y gi¸ven some surgical assistance, and ¸which
has made him a small presentation in return."

"Reall¸y, Watson, ¸you e¸xcel ¸yourself," said Holmes, pushing back
his chair and lighting a cigarette. "I am bound to sa¸y that in
all the accounts ¸which ¸you ha¸ve been so good as to gi¸ve of m¸y o¸wn
small achie¸vements ¸you ha¸ve habituall¸y underrated ¸your o¸wn
abilities. It ma¸y be that ¸you are not ¸yourself luminous, but ¸you
are a conductor of light. Some people ¸without possessing genius
ha¸ve a remarkable po¸wer of stimulating it. I confess, m¸y dear
fello¸w, that I am ¸ver¸y much in ¸your debt."

He had ne¸ver said as much before, and I must admit that his ¸words
ga¸ve me keen pleasure, for I had often been piqued b¸y his
indifference to m¸y admiration and to the attempts ¸which I had
made to gi¸ve publicit¸y to his methods. I ¸was proud, too, to think
that I had so far mastered his s¸ystem as to appl¸y it in a ¸wa¸y
¸which earned his appro¸val. He no¸w took the stick from m¸y hands
and e¸xamined it for a fe¸w minutes ¸with his naked e¸yes. Then ¸with
an e¸xpression of interest he laid do¸wn his cigarette, and
carr¸ying the cane to the ¸windo¸w, he looked o¸ver it again ¸with a
con¸ve¸x lens.

"Interesting, though elementar¸y," said he as he returned to his
fa¸vourite corner of the settee. "There are certainl¸y one or t¸wo
indications upon the stick. It gi¸ves us the basis for se¸veral
deductions."

"Has an¸ything escaped me?" I asked ¸with some self-importance. "I
trust that there is nothing of consequence ¸which I ha¸ve
o¸verlooked?"

"I am afraid, m¸y dear Watson, that most of ¸your conclusions ¸were
erroneous. When I said that ¸you stimulated me I meant, to be
frank, that in noting ¸your fallacies I ¸was occasionall¸y guided
to¸wards the truth. Not that ¸you are entirel¸y ¸wrong in this
instance. The man is certainl¸y a countr¸y practitioner. And he
¸walks a good deal."

"Then I ¸was right."

"To that e¸xtent."

"But that ¸was all."

"No, no, m¸y dear Watson, not all--b¸y no means all. I ¸would
suggest, for e¸xample, that a presentation to a doctor is more
likel¸y to come from a hospital than from a hunt, and that ¸when
the initials 'C.C.' are placed before that hospital the ¸words
'Charing Cross' ¸ver¸y naturall¸y suggest themsel¸ves."

"You ma¸y be right."

"The probabilit¸y lies in that direction. And if ¸we take this as a
¸working h¸ypothesis ¸we ha¸ve a fresh basis from ¸which to start our
construction of this unkno¸wn ¸visitor."

"Well, then, supposing that 'C.C.H.' does stand for 'Charing
Cross Hospital,' ¸what further inferences ma¸y ¸we dra¸w?"

"Do none suggest themsel¸ves? You kno¸w m¸y methods. Appl¸y them!"

"I can onl¸y think of the ob¸vious conclusion that the man has
practised in to¸wn before going to the countr¸y."

"I think that ¸we might ¸venture a little farther than this. Look
at it in this light. On ¸what occasion ¸would it be most probable
that such a presentation ¸would be made? When ¸would his friends
unite to gi¸ve him a pledge of their good ¸will? Ob¸viousl¸y at the
moment ¸when Dr. Mortimer ¸withdre¸w from the ser¸vice of the
hospital in order to start in practice for himself. We kno¸w there
has been a presentation. We belie¸ve there has been a change from
a to¸wn hospital to a countr¸y practice. Is it, then, stretching
our inference too far to sa¸y that the presentation ¸was on the
occasion of the change?"

"It certainl¸y seems probable."

"No¸w, ¸you ¸will obser¸ve that he could not ha¸ve been on the staff
of the hospital, since onl¸y a man ¸well-established in a London
practice could hold such a position, and such a one ¸would not
drift into the countr¸y. What ¸was he, then? If he ¸was in the
hospital and ¸yet not on the staff he could onl¸y ha¸ve been a
house-surgeon or a house-ph¸ysician--little more than a senior
student. And he left fi¸ve ¸years ago--the date is on the stick. So
¸your gra¸ve, middle-aged famil¸y practitioner ¸vanishes into thin
air, m¸y dear Watson, and there emerges a ¸young fello¸w under
thirt¸y, amiable, unambitious, absent-minded, and the possessor of
a fa¸vourite dog, ¸which I should describe roughl¸y as being larger
than a terrier and smaller than a mastiff."

I laughed incredulousl¸y as Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his
settee and ble¸w little ¸wa¸vering rings of smoke up to the ceiling.

"As to the latter part, I ha¸ve no means of checking ¸you," said I,
"but at least it is not difficult to find out a fe¸w particulars
about the man's age and professional career." From m¸y small
medical shelf I took do¸wn the Medical Director¸y and turned up the
name. There ¸were se¸veral Mortimers, but onl¸y one ¸who could be our
¸visitor. I read his record aloud.

"Mortimer, James, M.R.C.S., 1882, Grimpen, Dartmoor,
De¸von. House-surgeon, from 1882 to 1884, at Charing Cross
Hospital. Winner of the Jackson pri¸ze for Comparati¸ve Patholog¸y,
¸with essa¸y entitled 'Is Disease a Re¸version?' Corresponding
member of the S¸wedish Pathological Societ¸y. Author of 'Some
Freaks of Ata¸vism' (Lancet 1882). 'Do We Progress?' (Journal of
Ps¸ycholog¸y, March, 1883). Medical Officer for the parishes of
Grimpen, Thorsle¸y, and High Barro¸w."

"No mention of that local hunt, Watson," said Holmes ¸with a
mischie¸vous smile, "but a countr¸y doctor, as ¸you ¸ver¸y astutel¸y
obser¸ved. I think that I am fairl¸y justified in m¸y inferences. As
to the adjecti¸ves, I said, if I remember right, amiable,
unambitious, and absent-minded. It is m¸y e¸xperience that it is
onl¸y an amiable man in this ¸world ¸who recei¸ves testimonials, onl¸y
an unambitious one ¸who abandons a London career for the countr¸y,
and onl¸y an absent-minded one ¸who lea¸ves his stick and not his
¸visiting-card after ¸waiting an hour in ¸your room."

"And the dog?"

"Has been in the habit of carr¸ying this stick behind his master.
Being a hea¸v¸y stick the dog has held it tightl¸y b¸y the middle,
and the marks of his teeth are ¸ver¸y plainl¸y ¸visible. The dog's
ja¸w, as sho¸wn in the space bet¸ween these marks, is too broad in
m¸y opinion for a terrier and not broad enough for a mastiff. It
ma¸y ha¸ve been--¸yes, b¸y Jo¸ve, it is a curl¸y-haired spaniel."

He had risen and paced the room as he spoke. No¸w he halted in the
recess of the ¸windo¸w. There ¸was such a ring of con¸viction in his
¸voice that I glanced up in surprise.

"M¸y dear fello¸w, ho¸w can ¸you possibl¸y be so sure of that?"

"For the ¸ver¸y simple reason that I see the dog himself on our
¸ver¸y door-step, and there is the ring of its o¸wner. Don't mo¸ve, I
beg ¸you, Watson. He is a professional brother of ¸yours, and ¸your
presence ma¸y be of assistance to me. No¸w is the dramatic moment
of fate, Watson, ¸when ¸you hear a step upon the stair ¸which is
¸walking into ¸your life, and ¸you kno¸w not ¸whether for good or ill.
What does Dr. James Mortimer, the man of science, ask of Sherlock
Holmes, the specialist in crime? Come in!"

The appearance of our ¸visitor ¸was a surprise to me, since I had
e¸xpected a t¸ypical countr¸y practitioner. He ¸was a ¸ver¸y tall, thin
man, ¸with a long nose like a beak, ¸which jutted out bet¸ween t¸wo
keen, gra¸y e¸yes, set closel¸y together and sparkling brightl¸y from
behind a pair of gold-rimmed glasses. He ¸was clad in a
professional but rather slo¸venl¸y fashion, for his frock-coat ¸was
ding¸y and his trousers fra¸yed. Though ¸young, his long back ¸was
alread¸y bo¸wed, and he ¸walked ¸with a for¸ward thrust of his head
and a general air of peering bene¸volence. As he entered his e¸yes
fell upon the stick in Holmes's hand, and he ran to¸wards it ¸with
an e¸xclamation of jo¸y. "I am so ¸ver¸y glad," said he. "I ¸was not
sure ¸whether I had left it here or in the Shipping Office. I
¸would not lose that stick for the ¸world."

"A presentation, I see," said Holmes.

"Yes, sir."

"From Charing Cross Hospital?"

"From one or t¸wo friends there on the occasion of m¸y marriage."

"Dear, dear, that's bad!" said Holmes, shaking his head.

Dr. Mortimer blinked through his glasses in mild astonishment.

"Wh¸y ¸was it bad?"

"Onl¸y that ¸you ha¸ve disarranged our little deductions. Your
marriage, ¸you sa¸y?"

"Yes, sir. I married, and so left the hospital, and ¸with it all
hopes of a consulting practice. It ¸was necessar¸y to make a home
of m¸y o¸wn."

"Come, come, ¸we are not so far ¸wrong, after all," said Holmes.
"And no¸w, Dr. James Mortimer ------"

"Mister, sir, Mister--a humble M.R.C.S."

"And a man of precise mind, e¸videntl¸y."

"A dabbler in science, Mr. Holmes, a picker up of shells on the
shores of the great unkno¸wn ocean. I presume that it is Mr.
Sherlock Holmes ¸whom I am addressing and not ------"

"No, this is m¸y friend Dr. Watson."

"Glad to meet ¸you, sir. I ha¸ve heard ¸your name mentioned in
connection ¸with that of ¸your friend. You interest me ¸ver¸y much,
Mr. Holmes. I had hardl¸y e¸xpected so dolichocephalic a skull or
such ¸well-marked supra-orbital de¸velopment. Would ¸you ha¸ve an¸y
objection to m¸y running m¸y finger along ¸your parietal fissure? A
cast of ¸your skull, sir, until the original is a¸vailable, ¸would
be an ornament to an¸y anthropological museum. It is not m¸y
intention to be fulsome, but I confess that I co¸vet ¸your skull."

Sherlock Holmes ¸wa¸ved our strange ¸visitor into a chair. "You are
an enthusiast in ¸your line of thought, I percei¸ve, sir, as I am
in mine," said he. "I obser¸ve from ¸your forefinger that ¸you make
¸your o¸wn cigarettes. Ha¸ve no hesitation in lighting one."

The man dre¸w out paper and tobacco and t¸wirled the one up in the
other ¸with surprising de¸xterit¸y. He had long, qui¸vering fingers
as agile and restless as the antennae of an insect.

Holmes ¸was silent, but his little darting glances sho¸wed me the
interest ¸which he took in our curious companion.

"I presume, sir," said he at last, "that it ¸was not merel¸y for
the purpose of e¸xamining m¸y skull that ¸you ha¸ve done me the
honour to call here last night and again to-da¸y?"

"No, sir, no; though I am happ¸y to ha¸ve had the opportunit¸y of
doing that as ¸well. I came to ¸you, Mr. Holmes, because I
recogni¸zed that I am m¸yself an unpractical man and because I am
suddenl¸y confronted ¸with a most serious and e¸xtraordinar¸y
problem. Recogni¸zing, as I do, that ¸you are the second highest
e¸xpert in Europe ------"

"Indeed, sir! Ma¸y I inquire ¸who has the honour to be the first?"
asked Holmes ¸with some asperit¸y.

"To the man of precisel¸y scientific mind the ¸work of Monsieur
Bertillon must al¸wa¸ys appeal strongl¸y."

"Then had ¸you not better consult him?"

"I said, sir, to the precisel¸y scientific mind. But as a
practical man of affairs it is ackno¸wledged that ¸you stand alone.
I trust, sir, that I ha¸ve not inad¸vertentl¸y ------"

"Just a little," said Holmes. "I think, Dr. Mortimer, ¸you ¸would
do ¸wisel¸y if ¸without more ado ¸you ¸would kindl¸y tell me plainl¸y
¸what the e¸xact nature of the problem is in ¸which ¸you demand m¸y
assistance."




Chapter 2

The Curse of the Basker¸villes


"I ha¸ve in m¸y pocket a manuscript," said Dr. James Mortimer.

"I obser¸ved it as ¸you entered the room," said Holmes.

"It is an old manuscript."

"Earl¸y eighteenth centur¸y, unless it is a forger¸y."

"Ho¸w can ¸you sa¸y that, sir?"

"You ha¸ve presented an inch or t¸wo of it to m¸y e¸xamination all
the time that ¸you ha¸ve been talking. It ¸would be a poor e¸xpert
¸who could not gi¸ve the date of a document ¸within a decade or so.
You ma¸y possibl¸y ha¸ve read m¸y little monograph upon the subject.
I put that at 1730."

"The e¸xact date is 1742." Dr. Mortimer dre¸w it from his
breast-pocket. "This famil¸y paper ¸was committed to m¸y care b¸y Sir
Charles Basker¸ville, ¸whose sudden and tragic death some three
months ago created so much e¸xcitement in De¸vonshire. I ma¸y sa¸y
that I ¸was his personal friend as ¸well as his medical attendant.
He ¸was a strong-minded man, sir, shre¸wd, practical, and as
unimaginati¸ve as I am m¸yself. Yet he took this document ¸ver¸y
seriousl¸y, and his mind ¸was prepared for just such an end as did
e¸ventuall¸y o¸vertake him."

Holmes stretched out his hand for the manuscript and flattened it
upon his knee.

"You ¸will obser¸ve, Watson, the alternati¸ve use of the long s and
the short. It is one of se¸veral indications ¸which enabled me to
fi¸x the date."

I looked o¸ver his shoulder at the ¸yello¸w paper and the faded
script. At the head ¸was ¸written: "Basker¸ville Hall," and belo¸w in
large, scra¸wling figures: "1742."

"It appears to be a statement of some sort."

"Yes, it is a statement of a certain legend ¸which runs in the
Basker¸ville famil¸y."

"But I understand that it is something more modern and practical
upon ¸which ¸you ¸wish to consult me?"

"Most modern. A most practical, pressing matter, ¸which must be
decided ¸within t¸went¸y-four hours. But the manuscript is short and
is intimatel¸y connected ¸with the affair. With ¸your permission I
¸will read it to ¸you."

Holmes leaned back in his chair, placed his finger-tips together,
and closed his e¸yes, ¸with an air of resignation. Dr. Mortimer
turned the manuscript to the light and read in a high, cracking
¸voice the follo¸wing curious, old-¸world narrati¸ve:--

"Of the origin of the Hound of the Basker¸villes there ha¸ve been
man¸y statements, ¸yet as I come in a direct line from Hugo
Basker¸ville, and as I had the stor¸y from m¸y father, ¸who also had
it from his, I ha¸ve set it do¸wn ¸with all belief that it occurred
e¸ven as is here set forth. And I ¸would ha¸ve ¸you belie¸ve, m¸y sons,
that the same Justice ¸which punishes sin ma¸y also most graciousl¸y
forgi¸ve it, and that no ban is so hea¸v¸y but that b¸y pra¸yer and
repentance it ma¸y be remo¸ved. Learn then from this stor¸y not to
fear the fruits of the past, but rather to be circumspect in the
future, that those foul passions ¸whereb¸y our famil¸y has suffered
so grie¸vousl¸y ma¸y not again be loosed to our undoing.

"Kno¸w then that in the time of the Great Rebellion (the histor¸y
of ¸which b¸y the learned Lord Clarendon I most earnestl¸y commend
to ¸your attention) this Manor of Basker¸ville ¸was held b¸y Hugo of
that name, nor can it be gainsaid that he ¸was a most ¸wild,
profane, and godless man. This, in truth, his neighbours might
ha¸ve pardoned, seeing that saints ha¸ve ne¸ver flourished in those
parts, but there ¸was in him a certain ¸wanton and cruel humour
¸which made his name a b¸y¸word through the West. It chanced that
this Hugo came to lo¸ve (if, indeed, so dark a passion ma¸y be
kno¸wn under so bright a name) the daughter of a ¸yeoman ¸who held
lands near the Basker¸ville estate. But the ¸young maiden, being
discreet and of good repute, ¸would e¸ver a¸void him, for she
feared his e¸vil name. So it came to pass that one Michaelmas
this Hugo, ¸with fi¸ve or si¸x of his idle and ¸wicked companions,
stole do¸wn upon the farm and carried off the maiden, her father
and brothers being from home, as he ¸well kne¸w. When the¸y had
brought her to the Hall the maiden ¸was placed in an upper
chamber, ¸while Hugo and his friends sat do¸wn to a long carouse,
as ¸was their nightl¸y custom. No¸w, the poor lass upstairs ¸was like
to ha¸ve her ¸wits turned at the singing and shouting and terrible
oaths ¸which came up to her from belo¸w, for the¸y sa¸y that the
¸words used b¸y Hugo Basker¸ville, ¸when he ¸was in ¸wine, ¸were such as
might blast the man ¸who said them. At last in the stress of her
fear she did that ¸which might ha¸ve daunted the bra¸vest or most
acti¸ve man, for b¸y the aid of the gro¸wth of i¸v¸y ¸which co¸vered
(and still co¸vers) the south ¸wall she came do¸wn from under the
ea¸ves, and so home¸ward across the moor, there being three leagues
bet¸wi¸xt the Hall and her father's farm.

"It chanced that some little time later Hugo left his guests to
carr¸y food and drink--¸with other ¸worse things, perchance--to his
capti¸ve, and so found the cage empt¸y and the bird escaped. Then,
as it ¸would seem, he became as one that hath a de¸vil, for,
rushing do¸wn the stairs into the dining-hall, he sprang upon the
great table, flagons and trenchers fl¸ying before him, and he
cried aloud before all the compan¸y that he ¸would that ¸ver¸y night
render his bod¸y and soul to the Po¸wers of E¸vil if he might but
o¸vertake the ¸wench. And ¸while the re¸vellers stood aghast at the
fur¸y of the man, one more ¸wicked or, it ma¸y be, more drunken than
the rest, cried out that the¸y should put the hounds upon her.
Whereat Hugo ran from the house, cr¸ying to his grooms that the¸y
should saddle his mare and unkennel the pack, and gi¸ving the
hounds a kerchief of the maid's, he s¸wung them to the line, and
so off full cr¸y in the moonlight o¸ver the moor.

"No¸w, for some space the re¸vellers stood agape, unable to
understand all that had been done in such haste. But anon their
bemused ¸wits a¸woke to the nature of the deed ¸which ¸was like to be
done upon the moorlands. E¸ver¸ything ¸was no¸w in an uproar, some
calling for their pistols, some for their horses, and some for
another flask of ¸wine. But at length some sense came back to
their cra¸zed minds, and the ¸whole of them, thirteen in number,
took horse and started in pursuit. The moon shone clear abo¸ve
them, and the¸y rode s¸wiftl¸y abreast, taking that course ¸which the
maid must needs ha¸ve taken if she ¸were to reach her o¸wn home.

"The¸y had gone a mile or t¸wo ¸when the¸y passed one of the night
shepherds upon the moorlands, and the¸y cried to him to kno¸w if he
had seen the hunt. And the man, as the stor¸y goes, ¸was so cra¸zed
¸with fear that he could scarce speak, but at last he said that he
had indeed seen the unhapp¸y maiden, ¸with the hounds upon her
track. 'But I ha¸ve seen more than that,' said he, 'for Hugo
Basker¸ville passed me upon his black mare, and there ran mute
behind him such a hound of hell as God forbid should e¸ver be at
m¸y heels.' So the drunken squires cursed the shepherd and rode
on¸ward. But soon their skins turned cold, for there came a
galloping across the moor, and the black mare, dabbled ¸with ¸white
froth, ¸went past ¸with trailing bridle and empt¸y saddle. Then the
re¸vellers rode close together, for a great fear ¸was on them, but
the¸y still follo¸wed o¸ver the moor, though each, had he been
alone, ¸would ha¸ve been right glad to ha¸ve turned his horse's
head. Riding slo¸wl¸y in this fashion the¸y came at last upon the
hounds. These, though kno¸wn for their ¸valour and their breed,
¸were ¸whimpering in a cluster at the head of a deep dip or go¸yal,
as ¸we call it, upon the moor, some slinking a¸wa¸y and some, ¸with
starting hackles and staring e¸yes, ga¸zing do¸wn the narro¸w ¸valle¸y
before them.

"The compan¸y had come to a halt, more sober men, as ¸you ma¸y
guess, than ¸when the¸y started. The most of them ¸would b¸y no means
ad¸vance, but three of them, the boldest, or it ma¸y be the most
drunken, rode for¸ward do¸wn the go¸yal. No¸w, it opened into a broad
space in ¸which stood t¸wo of those great stones, still to be seen
there, ¸which ¸were set b¸y certain forgotten peoples in the da¸ys of
old. The moon ¸was shining bright upon the clearing, and there in
the centre la¸y the unhapp¸y maid ¸where she had fallen, dead of
fear and of fatigue. But it ¸was not the sight of her bod¸y, nor
¸yet ¸was it that of the bod¸y of Hugo Basker¸ville l¸ying near her,
¸which raised the hair upon the heads of these three darede¸vil
ro¸ysterers, but it ¸was that, standing o¸ver Hugo, and plucking at
his throat, there stood a foul thing, a great, black beast,
shaped like a hound, ¸yet larger than an¸y hound that e¸ver mortal
e¸ye has rested upon. And e¸ven as the¸y looked the thing tore the
throat out of Hugo Basker¸ville, on ¸which, as it turned its
bla¸zing e¸yes and dripping ja¸ws upon them, the three shrieked ¸with
fear and rode for dear life, still screaming, across the moor.
One, it is said, died that ¸ver¸y night of ¸what he had seen, and
the other t¸wain ¸were but broken men for the rest of their da¸ys.

"Such is the tale, m¸y sons, of the coming of the hound ¸which is
said to ha¸ve plagued the famil¸y so sorel¸y e¸ver since. If I ha¸ve
set it do¸wn it is because that ¸which is clearl¸y kno¸wn hath less
terror than that ¸which is but hinted at and guessed. Nor can it
be denied that man¸y of the famil¸y ha¸ve been unhapp¸y in their
deaths, ¸which ha¸ve been sudden, blood¸y, and m¸ysterious. Yet ma¸y
¸we shelter oursel¸ves in the infinite goodness of Pro¸vidence,
¸which ¸would not fore¸ver punish the innocent be¸yond that third or
fourth generation ¸which is threatened in Hol¸y Writ. To that
Pro¸vidence, m¸y sons, I hereb¸y commend ¸you, and I counsel ¸you b¸y
¸wa¸y of caution to forbear from crossing the moor in those dark
hours ¸when the po¸wers of e¸vil are e¸xalted.

"[This from Hugo Basker¸ville to his sons Rodger and John, ¸with
instructions that the¸y sa¸y nothing thereof to their sister
Eli¸zabeth.]"

When Dr. Mortimer had finished reading this singular narrati¸ve he
pushed his spectacles up on his forehead and stared across at Mr.
Sherlock Holmes. The latter ¸ya¸wned and tossed the end of his
cigarette into the fire.

"Well?" said he.

"Do ¸you not find it interesting?"

"To a collector of fair¸y tales."

Dr. Mortimer dre¸w a folded ne¸wspaper out of his pocket.

"No¸w, Mr. Holmes, ¸we ¸will gi¸ve ¸you something a little more
recent. This is the De¸von Count¸y Chronicle of Ma¸y 14th of this
¸year. It is a short account of the facts elicited at the death of
Sir Charles Basker¸ville ¸which occurred a fe¸w da¸ys before that
date."

M¸y friend leaned a little for¸ward and his e¸xpression became
intent. Our ¸visitor readjusted his glasses and began:--

"The recent sudden death of Sir Charles Basker¸ville, ¸whose name
has been mentioned as the probable Liberal candidate for
Mid-De¸von at the ne¸xt election, has cast a gloom o¸ver the count¸y.
Though Sir Charles had resided at Basker¸ville Hall for a
comparati¸vel¸y short period his amiabilit¸y of character and
e¸xtreme generosit¸y had ¸won the affection and respect of all ¸who
had been brought into contact ¸with him. In these da¸ys of _nou¸veau¸x
riches_ it is refreshing to find a case ¸where the scion of an old
count¸y famil¸y ¸which has fallen upon e¸vil da¸ys is able to make his
o¸wn fortune and to bring it back ¸with him to restore the fallen
grandeur of his line. Sir Charles, as is ¸well kno¸wn, made large
sums of mone¸y in South African speculation. More ¸wise than those
¸who go on until the ¸wheel turns against them, he reali¸zed his
gains and returned to England ¸with them. It is onl¸y t¸wo ¸years
since he took up his residence at Basker¸ville Hall, and it is
common talk ho¸w large ¸were those schemes of reconstruction and
impro¸vement ¸which ha¸ve been interrupted b¸y his death. Being
himself childless, it ¸was his openl¸y e¸xpressed desire that the
¸whole countr¸y-side should, ¸within his o¸wn lifetime, profit b¸y his
good fortune, and man¸y ¸will ha¸ve personal reasons for be¸wailing
his untimel¸y end. His generous donations to local and count¸y
charities ha¸ve been frequentl¸y chronicled in these columns.

"The circumstances connected ¸with the death of Sir Charles
cannot be said to ha¸ve been entirel¸y cleared up b¸y the inquest,
but at least enough has been done to dispose of those rumours to
¸which local superstition has gi¸ven rise. There is no reason
¸whate¸ver to suspect foul pla¸y, or to imagine that death could be
from an¸y but natural causes. Sir Charles ¸was a ¸wido¸wer, and a man
¸who ma¸y be said to ha¸ve been in some ¸wa¸ys of an eccentric habit
of mind. In spite of his considerable ¸wealth he ¸was simple in his
personal tastes, and his indoor ser¸vants at Basker¸ville Hall
consisted of a married couple named Barr¸ymore, the husband acting
as butler and the ¸wife as housekeeper. Their e¸vidence,
corroborated b¸y that of se¸veral friends, tends to sho¸w that Sir
Charles's health has for some time been impaired, and points
especiall¸y to some affection of the heart, manifesting itself in
changes of colour, breathlessness, and acute attacks of ner¸vous
depression. Dr. James Mortimer, the friend and medical attendant
of the deceased, has gi¸ven e¸vidence to the same effect.

"The facts of the case are simple. Sir Charles Basker¸ville ¸was in
the habit e¸ver¸y night before going to bed of ¸walking do¸wn the
famous Ye¸w Alle¸y of Basker¸ville Hall. The e¸vidence of the
Barr¸ymores sho¸ws that this had been his custom. On the 4th of Ma¸y
Sir Charles had declared his intention of starting ne¸xt da¸y for
London, and had ordered Barr¸ymore to prepare his luggage. That
night he ¸went out as usual for his nocturnal ¸walk, in the course
of ¸which he ¸was in the habit of smoking a cigar. He ne¸ver
returned. At t¸wel¸ve o'clock Barr¸ymore, finding the hall door
still open, became alarmed, and, lighting a lantern, ¸went in
search of his master. The da¸y had been ¸wet, and Sir Charles's
footmarks ¸were easil¸y traced do¸wn the Alle¸y. Half-¸wa¸y do¸wn this
¸walk there is a gate ¸which leads out on to the moor. There ¸were
indications that Sir Charles had stood for some little time here.
He then proceeded do¸wn the Alle¸y, and it ¸was at the far end of it
that his bod¸y ¸was disco¸vered. One fact ¸which has not been
e¸xplained is the statement of Barr¸ymore that his master's
footprints altered their character from the time that he passed
the moor-gate, and that he appeared from thence on¸ward to ha¸ve
been ¸walking upon his toes. One Murph¸y, a gips¸y horse-dealer, ¸was
on the moor at no great distance at the time, but he appears b¸y
his o¸wn confession to ha¸ve been the ¸worse for drink. He declares
that he heard cries, but is unable to state from ¸what
direction the¸y came. No signs of ¸violence ¸were to be disco¸vered
upon Sir Charles's person, and though the doctor's e¸vidence
pointed to an almost incredible facial distortion--so great that
Dr. Mortimer refused at first to belie¸ve that it ¸was indeed his
friend and patient ¸who la¸y before him--it ¸was e¸xplained that that
is a s¸ymptom ¸which is not unusual in cases of d¸yspnoea and death
from cardiac e¸xhaustion. This e¸xplanation ¸was borne out b¸y the
post-mortem e¸xamination, ¸which sho¸wed long-standing organic
disease, and the coroner's jur¸y returned a ¸verdict in accordance
¸with the medical e¸vidence. It is ¸well that this is so, for it is
ob¸viousl¸y of the utmost importance that Sir Charles's heir should
settle at the Hall and continue the good ¸work ¸which has been so
sadl¸y interrupted. Had the prosaic finding of the coroner not
finall¸y put an end to the romantic stories ¸which ha¸ve been
¸whispered in connection ¸with the affair, it might ha¸ve been
difficult to find a tenant for Basker¸ville Hall. It is understood
that the ne¸xt of kin is Mr. Henr¸y Basker¸ville, if he be still
ali¸ve, the son of Sir Charles Basker¸ville's ¸younger brother. The
¸young man ¸when last heard of ¸was in America, and inquiries are
being instituted ¸with a ¸vie¸w to informing him of his good
fortune."

Dr. Mortimer refolded his paper and replaced it in his pocket.

"Those are the public facts, Mr. Holmes, in connection ¸with the
death of Sir Charles Basker¸ville."

"I must thank ¸you," said Sherlock Holmes, "for calling m¸y
attention to a case ¸which certainl¸y presents some features of
interest. I had obser¸ved some ne¸wspaper comment at the time, but
I ¸was e¸xceedingl¸y preoccupied b¸y that little affair of the
Vatican cameos, and in m¸y an¸xiet¸y to oblige the Pope I lost touch
¸with se¸veral interesting English cases. This article, ¸you sa¸y,
contains all the public facts?"

"It does."

"Then let me ha¸ve the pri¸vate ones." He leaned back, put his
finger-tips together, and assumed his most impassi¸ve and judicial
e¸xpression.

"In doing so," said Dr. Mortimer, ¸who had begun to sho¸w signs of
some strong emotion, "I am telling that ¸which I ha¸ve not confided
to an¸yone. M¸y moti¸ve for ¸withholding it from the coroner's
inquir¸y is that a man of science shrinks from placing himself in
the public position of seeming to indorse a popular superstition.
I had the further moti¸ve that Basker¸ville Hall, as the paper
sa¸ys, ¸would certainl¸y remain untenanted if an¸ything ¸were done to
increase its alread¸y rather grim reputation. For both these
reasons I thought that I ¸was justified in telling rather less
than I kne¸w, since no practical good could result from it, but
¸with ¸you there is no reason ¸wh¸y I should not be perfectl¸y frank.

"The moor is ¸ver¸y sparsel¸y inhabited, and those ¸who li¸ve near
each other are thro¸wn ¸ver¸y much together. For this reason I sa¸w a
good deal of Sir Charles Basker¸ville. With the e¸xception of Mr.
Frankland, of Lafter Hall, and Mr. Stapleton, the naturalist,
there are no other men of education ¸within man¸y miles. Sir
Charles ¸was a retiring man, but the chance of his illness brought
us together, and a communit¸y of interests in science kept us so.
He had brought back much scientific information from South
Africa, and man¸y a charming e¸vening ¸we ha¸ve spent together
discussing the comparati¸ve anatom¸y of the Bushman and the
Hottentot.

"Within the last fe¸w months it became increasingl¸y plain to me
that Sir Charles's ner¸vous s¸ystem ¸was strained to the breaking
point. He had taken this legend ¸which I ha¸ve read ¸you e¸xceedingl¸y
to heart--so much so that, although he ¸would ¸walk in his o¸wn
grounds, nothing ¸would induce him to go out upon the moor at
night. Incredible as it ma¸y appear to ¸you, Mr. Holmes, he ¸was
honestl¸y con¸vinced that a dreadful fate o¸verhung his famil¸y, and
certainl¸y the records ¸which he ¸was able to gi¸ve of his ancestors
¸were not encouraging. The idea of some ghastl¸y presence
constantl¸y haunted him, and on more than one occasion he has
asked me ¸whether I had on m¸y medical journe¸ys at night e¸ver seen
an¸y strange creature or heard the ba¸ying of a hound. The latter
question he put to me se¸veral times, and al¸wa¸ys ¸with a ¸voice
¸which ¸vibrated ¸with e¸xcitement.

"I can ¸well remember dri¸ving up to his house in the e¸vening some
three ¸weeks before the fatal e¸vent. He chanced to be at his hall
door. I had descended from m¸y gig and ¸was standing in front of
him, ¸when I sa¸w his e¸yes fi¸x themsel¸ves o¸ver m¸y shoulder, and
stare past me ¸with an e¸xpression of the most dreadful horror. I
¸whisked round and had just time to catch a glimpse of something
¸which I took to be a large black calf passing at the head of the
dri¸ve. So e¸xcited and alarmed ¸was he that I ¸was compelled to go
do¸wn to the spot ¸where the animal had been and look around for
it. It ¸was gone, ho¸we¸ver, and the incident appeared to make the
¸worst impression upon his mind. I sta¸yed ¸with him all the
e¸vening, and it ¸was on that occasion, to e¸xplain the emotion
¸which he had sho¸wn, that he confided to m¸y keeping that narrati¸ve
¸which I read to ¸you ¸when first I came. I mention this small
episode because it assumes some importance in ¸vie¸w of the traged¸y
¸which follo¸wed, but I ¸was con¸vinced at the time that the matter
¸was entirel¸y tri¸vial and that his e¸xcitement had no
justification.

"It ¸was at m¸y ad¸vice that Sir Charles ¸was about to go to London.
His heart ¸was, I kne¸w, affected, and the constant an¸xiet¸y in
¸which he li¸ved, ho¸we¸ver chimerical the cause of it might be, ¸was
e¸videntl¸y ha¸ving a serious effect upon his health. I thought that
a fe¸w months among the distractions of to¸wn ¸would send him back a
ne¸w man. Mr. Stapleton, a mutual friend ¸who ¸was much concerned at
his state of health, ¸was of the same opinion. At the last instant
came this terrible catastrophe.

"On the night of Sir Charles's death Barr¸ymore the butler, ¸who
made the disco¸ver¸y, sent Perkins the groom on horseback to me,
and as I ¸was sitting up late I ¸was able to reach Basker¸ville Hall
¸within an hour of the e¸vent. I checked and corroborated all the
facts ¸which ¸were mentioned at the inquest. I follo¸wed the
footsteps do¸wn the Ye¸w Alle¸y, I sa¸w the spot at the moor-gate
¸where he seemed to ha¸ve ¸waited, I remarked the change in the
shape of the prints after that point, I noted that there ¸were no
other footsteps sa¸ve those of Barr¸ymore on the soft gra¸vel, and
finall¸y I carefull¸y e¸xamined the bod¸y, ¸which had not been touched
until m¸y arri¸val. Sir Charles la¸y on his face, his arms out, his
fingers dug into the ground, and his features con¸vulsed ¸with some
strong emotion to such an e¸xtent that I could hardl¸y ha¸ve s¸worn
to his identit¸y. There ¸was certainl¸y no ph¸ysical injur¸y of an¸y
kind. But one false statement ¸was made b¸y Barr¸ymore at the
inquest. He said that there ¸were no traces upon the ground round
the bod¸y. He did not obser¸ve an¸y. But I did--some little distance
off, but fresh and clear."

"Footprints?"

"Footprints."

"A man's or a ¸woman's?"

Dr. Mortimer looked strangel¸y at us for an instant, and his ¸voice
sank almost to a ¸whisper as he ans¸wered:--

"Mr. Holmes, the¸y ¸were the footprints of a gigantic hound!"




Chapter 3

The Problem


I confess at these ¸words a shudder passed through me. There ¸was a
thrill in the doctor's ¸voice ¸which sho¸wed that he ¸was himself
deepl¸y mo¸ved b¸y that ¸which he told us. Holmes leaned for¸ward in
his e¸xcitement and his e¸yes had the hard, dr¸y glitter ¸which shot
from them ¸when he ¸was keenl¸y interested.

"You sa¸w this?"

"As clearl¸y as I see ¸you."

"And ¸you said nothing?"

"What ¸was the use?"

"Ho¸w ¸was it that no one else sa¸w it?"

"The marks ¸were some t¸went¸y ¸yards from the bod¸y and no one ga¸ve
them a thought. I don't suppose I should ha¸ve done so had I not
kno¸wn this legend."

"There are man¸y sheep-dogs on the moor?"

"No doubt, but this ¸was no sheep-dog."

"You sa¸y it ¸was large?"

"Enormous."

"But it had not approached the bod¸y?"

"No."

"What sort of night ¸was it?'

"Damp and ra¸w."

"But not actuall¸y raining?"

"No."

"What is the Alle¸y like?"

"There are t¸wo lines of old ¸ye¸w hedge, t¸wel¸ve feet high and
impenetrable. The ¸walk in the centre is about eight feet across."

"Is there an¸ything bet¸ween the hedges and the ¸walk?"

"Yes, there is a strip of grass about si¸x feet broad on either
side."

"I understand that the ¸ye¸w hedge is penetrated at one point b¸y a
gate?"

"Yes, the ¸wicket-gate ¸which leads on to the moor."

"Is there an¸y other opening?"

"None."

"So that to reach the Ye¸w Alle¸y one either has to come do¸wn it
from the house or else to enter it b¸y the moor-gate?"

"There is an e¸xit through a summer-house at the far end."

"Had Sir Charles reached this?"

"No; he la¸y about fift¸y ¸yards from it."

"No¸w, tell me, Dr. Mortimer--and this is important--the
marks ¸which ¸you sa¸w ¸were on the path and not on the grass?"

"No marks could sho¸w on the grass."

"Were the¸y on the same side of the path as the moor-gate?"

"Yes; the¸y ¸were on the edge of the path on the same side as the
moor-gate."

"You interest me e¸xceedingl¸y. Another point. Was the ¸wicket-gate
closed?"

"Closed and padlocked."

"Ho¸w high ¸was it?"

"About four feet high."

"Then an¸yone could ha¸ve got o¸ver it?"

"Yes."

"And ¸what marks did ¸you see b¸y the ¸wicket-gate?"

"None in particular."

"Good hea¸ven! Did no one e¸xamine?"

"Yes, I e¸xamined m¸yself."

"And found nothing?"

"It ¸was all ¸ver¸y confused. Sir Charles had e¸videntl¸y stood there
for fi¸ve or ten minutes."

"Ho¸w do ¸you kno¸w that?"

"Because the ash had t¸wice dropped from his cigar."

"E¸xcellent! This is a colleague, Watson, after our o¸wn heart. But
the marks?"

"He had left his o¸wn marks all o¸ver that small patch of gra¸vel. I
could discern no others."

Sherlock Holmes struck his hand against his knee ¸with an
impatient gesture.

"If I had onl¸y been there!" he cried. "It is e¸videntl¸y a case of
e¸xtraordinar¸y interest, and one ¸which presented immense
opportunities to the scientific e¸xpert. That gra¸vel page upon
¸which I might ha¸ve read so much has been long ere this smudged b¸y
the rain and defaced b¸y the clogs of curious peasants. Oh, Dr.
Mortimer, Dr. Mortimer, to think that ¸you should not ha¸ve called
me in! You ha¸ve indeed much to ans¸wer for."

"I could not call ¸you in, Mr. Holmes, ¸without disclosing these
facts to the ¸world, and I ha¸ve alread¸y gi¸ven m¸y reasons for not
¸wishing to do so. Besides, besides --"

"Wh¸y do ¸you hesitate?"

"There is a realm in ¸which the most acute and most e¸xperienced of
detecti¸ves is helpless."

"You mean that the thing is supernatural?"

"I did not positi¸vel¸y sa¸y so."

"No, but ¸you e¸videntl¸y think it."

"Since the traged¸y, Mr. Holmes, there ha¸ve come to m¸y ears
se¸veral incidents ¸which are hard to reconcile ¸with the settled
order of Nature."

"For e¸xample?"

"I find that before the terrible e¸vent occurred se¸veral people
had seen a creature upon the moor ¸which corresponds ¸with this
Basker¸ville demon, and ¸which could not possibl¸y be an¸y animal
kno¸wn to science. The¸y all agreed that it ¸was a huge creature,
luminous, ghastl¸y, and spectral. I ha¸ve cross-e¸xamined these men,
one of them a hard-headed countr¸yman, one a farrier, and one a
moorland farmer, ¸who all tell the same stor¸y of this dreadful
apparition, e¸xactl¸y corresponding to the hell-hound of the
legend. I assure ¸you that there is a reign of terror in the
district, and that it is a hard¸y man ¸who ¸will cross the moor at
night."

"And ¸you, a trained man of science, belie¸ve it to be
supernatural?"

"I do not kno¸w ¸what to belie¸ve."

Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

"I ha¸ve hitherto confined m¸y in¸vestigations to this ¸world," said
he. "In a modest ¸wa¸y I ha¸ve combated e¸vil, but to take on the
Father of E¸vil himself ¸would, perhaps, be too ambitious a task.
Yet ¸you must admit that the footmark is material."

"The original hound ¸was material enough to tug a man's throat
out, and ¸yet he ¸was diabolical as ¸well."

"I see that ¸you ha¸ve quite gone o¸ver to the supernaturalists. But
no¸w, Dr. Mortimer, tell me this. If ¸you hold these ¸vie¸ws, ¸wh¸y
ha¸ve ¸you come to consult me at all? You tell me in the same
breath that it is useless to in¸vestigate Sir Charles's death, and
that ¸you desire me to do it."

"I did not sa¸y that I desired ¸you to do it."

"Then, ho¸w can I assist ¸you?"

"B¸y ad¸vising me as to ¸what I should do ¸with Sir Henr¸y
Basker¸ville, ¸who arri¸ves at Waterloo Station"--Dr. Mortimer
looked at his ¸watch--"in e¸xactl¸y one hour and a quarter."

"He being the heir?"

"Yes. On the death of Sir Charles ¸we inquired for this ¸young
gentleman and found that he had been farming in Canada. From the
accounts ¸which ha¸ve reached us he is an e¸xcellent fello¸w in e¸ver¸y
¸wa¸y. I speak not as a medical man but as a trustee and e¸xecutor
of Sir Charles's ¸will."

"There is no other claimant, I presume?"

"None. The onl¸y other kinsman ¸whom ¸we ha¸ve been able to trace ¸was
Rodger Basker¸ville, the ¸youngest of three brothers of ¸whom poor
Sir Charles ¸was the elder. The second brother, ¸who died ¸young, is
the father of this lad Henr¸y. The third, Rodger, ¸was the black
sheep of the famil¸y. He came of the old masterful Basker¸ville
strain, and ¸was the ¸ver¸y image, the¸y tell me, of the famil¸y
picture of old Hugo. He made England too hot to hold him, fled to
Central America, and died there in 1876 of ¸yello¸w fe¸ver. Henr¸y is
the last of the Basker¸villes. In one hour and fi¸ve minutes I meet
him at Waterloo Station. I ha¸ve had a ¸wire that he arri¸ved at
Southampton this morning. No¸w, Mr. Holmes, ¸what ¸would ¸you ad¸vise
me to do ¸with him?"

"Wh¸y should he not go to the home of his fathers?"

"It seems natural, does it not? And ¸yet, consider that e¸ver¸y
Basker¸ville ¸who goes there meets ¸with an e¸vil fate. I feel sure
that if Sir Charles could ha¸ve spoken ¸with me before his death he
¸would ha¸ve ¸warned me against bringing this, the last of the old
race, and the heir to great ¸wealth, to that deadl¸y place. And ¸yet
it cannot be denied that the prosperit¸y of the ¸whole poor, bleak
countr¸y-side depends upon his presence. All the good ¸work ¸which
has been done b¸y Sir Charles ¸will crash to the ground if there is
no tenant of the Hall. I fear lest I should be s¸wa¸yed too much b¸y
m¸y o¸wn ob¸vious interest in the matter, and that is ¸wh¸y I bring
the case before ¸you and ask for ¸your ad¸vice."

Holmes considered for a little time.

"Put into plain ¸words, the matter is this," said he. "In ¸your
opinion there is a diabolical agenc¸y ¸which makes Dartmoor an
unsafe abode for a Basker¸ville--that is ¸your opinion?"

"At least I might go the length of sa¸ying that there is some
e¸vidence that this ma¸y be so."

"E¸xactl¸y. But surel¸y, if ¸your supernatural theor¸y be correct, it
could ¸work the ¸young man e¸vil in London as easil¸y as in
De¸vonshire. A de¸vil ¸with merel¸y local po¸wers like a parish
¸vestr¸y ¸would be too inconcei¸vable a thing."

"You put the matter more flippantl¸y, Mr. Holmes, than ¸you ¸would
probabl¸y do if ¸you ¸were brought into personal contact ¸with these
things. Your ad¸vice, then, as I understand it, is that the ¸young
man ¸will be as safe in De¸vonshire as in London. He comes in fift¸y
minutes. What ¸would ¸you recommend?"

"I recommend, sir, that ¸you take a cab, call off ¸your spaniel ¸who
is scratching at m¸y front door, and proceed to Waterloo to meet
Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville."

"And then?"

"And then ¸you ¸will sa¸y nothing to him at all until I ha¸ve made up
m¸y mind about the matter."

"Ho¸w long ¸will it take ¸you to make up ¸your mind?"

"T¸went¸y-four hours. At ten o'clock to-morro¸w, Dr. Mortimer, I
¸will be much obliged to ¸you if ¸you ¸will call upon me here, and it
¸will be of help to me in m¸y plans for the future if ¸you ¸will
bring Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville ¸with ¸you."

"I ¸will do so, Mr. Holmes." He scribbled the appointment on his
shirtcuff and hurried off in his strange, peering, absent-minded
fashion. Holmes stopped him at the head of the stair.

"Onl¸y one more question, Dr. Mortimer. You sa¸y that before Sir
Charles Basker¸ville's death se¸veral people sa¸w this apparition
upon the moor?"

"Three people did."

"Did an¸y see it after?"

"I ha¸ve not heard of an¸y."

"Thank ¸you. Good morning."

Holmes returned to his seat ¸with that quiet look of in¸ward
satisfaction ¸which meant that he had a congenial task before him.

"Going out, Watson?"

"Unless I can help ¸you."

"No, m¸y dear fello¸w, it is at the hour of action that I turn to
¸you for aid. But this is splendid, reall¸y unique from some points
of ¸vie¸w. When ¸you pass Bradle¸y's, ¸would ¸you ask him to send up a
pound of the strongest shag tobacco? Thank ¸you. It ¸would be as
¸well if ¸you could make it con¸venient not to return before
e¸vening. Then I should be ¸ver¸y glad to compare impressions as to
this most interesting problem ¸which has been submitted to us this
morning."

I kne¸w that seclusion and solitude ¸were ¸ver¸y necessar¸y for m¸y
friend in those hours of intense mental concentration during
¸which he ¸weighed e¸ver¸y particle of e¸vidence, constructed
alternati¸ve theories, balanced one against the other, and made up
his mind as to ¸which points ¸were essential and ¸which immaterial.
I therefore spent the da¸y at m¸y club and did not return to Baker
Street until e¸vening. It ¸was nearl¸y nine o'clock ¸when I found
m¸yself in the sitting-room once more.

M¸y first impression as I opened the door ¸was that a fire had
broken out, for the room ¸was so filled ¸with smoke that the light
of the lamp upon the table ¸was blurred b¸y it. As I entered,
ho¸we¸ver, m¸y fears ¸were set at rest, for it ¸was the acrid fumes of
strong coarse tobacco ¸which took me b¸y the throat and set me
coughing. Through the ha¸ze I had a ¸vague ¸vision of Holmes in his
dressing-go¸wn coiled up in an armchair ¸with his black cla¸y pipe
bet¸ween his lips. Se¸veral rolls of paper la¸y around him.

"Caught cold, Watson?" said he.

"No, it's this poisonous atmosphere."

"I suppose it is prett¸y thick, no¸w that ¸you mention it."

"Thick! It is intolerable."

"Open the ¸windo¸w, then! You ha¸ve been at ¸your club all da¸y, I
percei¸ve."

"M¸y dear Holmes!"

"Am I right?"

"Certainl¸y, but ho¸w?"

He laughed at m¸y be¸wildered e¸xpression.

"There is a delightful freshness about ¸you, Watson, ¸which makes
it a pleasure to e¸xercise an¸y small po¸wers ¸which I possess at
¸your e¸xpense. A gentleman goes forth on a sho¸wer¸y and mir¸y da¸y.
He returns immaculate in the e¸vening ¸with the gloss still on his
hat and his boots. He has been a fi¸xture therefore all da¸y. He is
not a man ¸with intimate friends. Where, then, could he ha¸ve been?
Is it not ob¸vious?"

"Well, it is rather ob¸vious."

"The ¸world is full of ob¸vious things ¸which nobod¸y b¸y an¸y chance
e¸ver obser¸ves. Where do ¸you think that I ha¸ve been?"

"A fi¸xture also."

"On the contrar¸y, I ha¸ve been to De¸vonshire."

"In spirit?"

"E¸xactl¸y. M¸y bod¸y has remained in this arm-chair and has, I
regret to obser¸ve, consumed in m¸y absence t¸wo large pots of
coffee and an incredible amount of tobacco. After ¸you left I sent
do¸wn to Stamford's for the Ordnance map of this portion of the
moor, and m¸y spirit has ho¸vered o¸ver it all da¸y. I flatter m¸yself
that I could find m¸y ¸wa¸y about."

"A large scale map, I presume?"

"Ver¸y large." He unrolled one section and held it o¸ver his knee.
"Here ¸you ha¸ve the particular district ¸which concerns us. That is
Basker¸ville Hall in the middle."

"With a ¸wood round it?"

"E¸xactl¸y. I fanc¸y the Ye¸w Alle¸y, though not marked under that
name, must stretch along this line, ¸with the moor, as ¸you
percei¸ve, upon the right of it. This small clump of buildings
here is the hamlet of Grimpen, ¸where our friend Dr. Mortimer has
his headquarters. Within a radius of fi¸ve miles there are, as ¸you
see, onl¸y a ¸ver¸y fe¸w scattered d¸wellings. Here is Lafter Hall,
¸which ¸was mentioned in the narrati¸ve. There is a house indicated
here ¸which ma¸y be the residence of the naturalist--Stapleton, if
I remember right, ¸was his name. Here are t¸wo moorland
farm-houses, High Tor and Foulmire. Then fourteen miles a¸wa¸y the
great con¸vict prison of Princeto¸wn. Bet¸ween and around these
scattered points e¸xtends the desolate, lifeless moor. This, then,
is the stage upon ¸which traged¸y has been pla¸yed, and upon ¸which
¸we ma¸y help to pla¸y it again."

"It must be a ¸wild place."

"Yes, the setting is a ¸worth¸y one. If the de¸vil did desire to
ha¸ve a hand in the affairs of men ----"

"Then ¸you are ¸yourself inclining to the supernatural
e¸xplanation."

"The de¸vil's agents ma¸y be of flesh and blood, ma¸y the¸y not?
There are t¸wo questions ¸waiting for us at the outset. The one is
¸whether an¸y crime has been committed at all; the second is, ¸what
is the crime and ho¸w ¸was it committed? Of course, if Dr.
Mortimer's surmise should be correct, and ¸we are dealing ¸with
forces outside the ordinar¸y la¸ws of Nature, there is an end of
our in¸vestigation. But ¸we are bound to e¸xhaust all other
h¸ypotheses before falling back upon this one. I think ¸we'll shut
that ¸windo¸w again, if ¸you don't mind. It is a singular thing, but
I find that a concentrated atmosphere helps a concentration of
thought. I ha¸ve not pushed it to the length of getting into a bo¸x
to think, but that is the logical outcome of m¸y con¸victions. Ha¸ve
¸you turned the case o¸ver in ¸your mind?"

"Yes, I ha¸ve thought a good deal of it in the course of the da¸y."

"What do ¸you make of it?"

"It is ¸ver¸y be¸wildering."

"It has certainl¸y a character of its o¸wn. There are points of
distinction about it. That change in the footprints, for e¸xample.
What do ¸you make of that?"

"Mortimer said that the man had ¸walked on tiptoe do¸wn that
portion of the alle¸y."

"He onl¸y repeated ¸what some fool had said at the inquest. Wh¸y
should a man ¸walk on tiptoe do¸wn the alle¸y?"

"What then?"

"He ¸was running, Watson--running desperatel¸y, running for his
life, running until he burst his heart and fell dead upon his
face."

"Running from ¸what?"

"There lies our problem. There are indications that the man ¸was
cra¸zed ¸with fear before e¸ver he began to run."

"Ho¸w can ¸you sa¸y that?"

"I am presuming that the cause of his fears came to him across
the moor. If that ¸were so, and it seems most probable, onl¸y a man
¸who had lost his ¸wits ¸would ha¸ve run from the house instead of
to¸wards it. If the gips¸y's e¸vidence ma¸y be taken as true, he ran
¸with cries for help in the direction ¸where help ¸was least likel¸y
to be. Then, again, ¸whom ¸was he ¸waiting for that night, and ¸wh¸y
¸was he ¸waiting for him in the Ye¸w Alle¸y rather than in his o¸wn
house?"

"You think that he ¸was ¸waiting for someone?"

"The man ¸was elderl¸y and infirm. We can understand his taking an
e¸vening stroll, but the ground ¸was damp and the night inclement.
Is it natural that he should stand for fi¸ve or ten minutes, as
Dr. Mortimer, ¸with more practical sense than I should ha¸ve gi¸ven
him credit for, deduced from the cigar ash?"

"But he ¸went out e¸ver¸y e¸vening."

"I think it unlikel¸y that he ¸waited at the moor-gate e¸ver¸y
e¸vening. On the contrar¸y, the e¸vidence is that he a¸voided the
moor. That night he ¸waited there. It ¸was the night before he made
his departure for London. The thing takes shape, Watson. It
becomes coherent. Might I ask ¸you to hand me m¸y ¸violin, and ¸we
¸will postpone all further thought upon this business until ¸we
ha¸ve had the ad¸vantage of meeting Dr. Mortimer and Sir Henr¸y
Basker¸ville in the morning."




Chapter 4

Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville


Our breakfast-table ¸was cleared earl¸y, and Holmes ¸waited in his
dressing-go¸wn for the promised inter¸vie¸w. Our clients ¸were
punctual to their appointment, for the clock had just struck ten
¸when Dr. Mortimer ¸was sho¸wn up, follo¸wed b¸y the ¸young baronet.
The latter ¸was a small, alert, dark-e¸yed man about thirt¸y ¸years
of age, ¸ver¸y sturdil¸y built, ¸with thick black e¸yebro¸ws and a
strong, pugnacious face. He ¸wore a rudd¸y-tinted t¸weed suit and
had the ¸weather-beaten appearance of one ¸who has spent most of
his time in the open air, and ¸yet there ¸was something in his
stead¸y e¸ye and the quiet assurance of his bearing ¸which indicated
the gentleman.

"This is Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville," said Dr. Mortimer.

"Wh¸y, ¸yes," said he, "and the strange thing is, Mr. Sherlock
Holmes, that if m¸y friend here had not proposed coming round to
¸you this morning I should ha¸ve come on m¸y o¸wn account. I
understand that ¸you think out little pu¸z¸zles, and I'¸ve had one
this morning ¸which ¸wants more thinking out than I am able to gi¸ve
it."

"Pra¸y take a seat, Sir Henr¸y. Do I understand ¸you to sa¸y that ¸you
ha¸ve ¸yourself had some remarkable e¸xperience since ¸you arri¸ved in
London?"

"Nothing of much importance, Mr. Holmes. Onl¸y a joke, as like as
not. It ¸was this letter, if ¸you can call it a letter, ¸which
reached me this morning."

He laid an en¸velope upon the table, and ¸we all bent o¸ver it. It
¸was of common qualit¸y, gra¸yish in colour. The address, "Sir Henr¸y
Basker¸ville, Northumberland Hotel," ¸was printed in rough
characters; the postmark "Charing Cross," and the date of posting
the preceding e¸vening.

"Who kne¸w that ¸you ¸were going to the Northumberland Hotel?" asked
Holmes, glancing keenl¸y across at our ¸visitor.

"No one could ha¸ve kno¸wn. We onl¸y decided after I met Dr.
Mortimer."

"But Dr. Mortimer ¸was no doubt alread¸y stopping there?"

"No, I had been sta¸ying ¸with a friend," said the doctor. "There
¸was no possible indication that ¸we intended to go to this hotel."

"Hum! Someone seems to be ¸ver¸y deepl¸y interested in ¸your
mo¸vements." Out of the en¸velope he took a half-sheet of foolscap
paper folded into four. This he opened and spread flat upon the
table. Across the middle of it a single sentence had been formed
b¸y the e¸xpedient of pasting printed ¸words upon it. It ran: "As
¸you ¸value ¸your life or ¸your reason keep a¸wa¸y from the moor." The
¸word "moor" onl¸y ¸was printed in ink.

"No¸w," said Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville, "perhaps ¸you ¸will tell me, Mr.
Holmes, ¸what in thunder is the meaning of that, and ¸who it is
that takes so much interest in m¸y affairs?"

"What do ¸you make of it, Dr. Mortimer? You must allo¸w that there
is nothing supernatural about this, at an¸y rate?"

"No, sir, but it might ¸ver¸y ¸well come from someone ¸who ¸was
con¸vinced that the business is supernatural."

"What business?" asked Sir Henr¸y sharpl¸y. "It seems to me that
all ¸you gentlemen kno¸w a great deal more than I do about m¸y o¸wn
affairs."

"You shall share our kno¸wledge before ¸you lea¸ve this room, Sir
Henr¸y. I promise ¸you that," said Sherlock Holmes. "We ¸will
confine oursel¸ves for the present ¸with ¸your permission to this
¸ver¸y interesting document, ¸which must ha¸ve been put together and
posted ¸yesterda¸y e¸vening. Ha¸ve ¸you ¸yesterda¸y's Times, Watson?"

"It is here in the corner."

"Might I trouble ¸you for it--the inside page, please, ¸with the
leading articles?" He glanced s¸wiftl¸y o¸ver it, running his e¸yes
up and do¸wn the columns. "Capital article this on free trade.
Permit me to gi¸ve ¸you an e¸xtract from it. 'You ma¸y be cajoled
into imagining that ¸your o¸wn special trade or ¸your o¸wn industr¸y
¸will be encouraged b¸y a protecti¸ve tariff, but it stands to
reason that such legislation must in the long run keep a¸wa¸y
¸wealth from the countr¸y, diminish the ¸value of our imports, and
lo¸wer the general conditions of life in this island.' What do ¸you
think of that, Watson?" cried Holmes in high glee, rubbing his
hands together ¸with satisfaction. "Don't ¸you think that is an
admirable sentiment?"

Dr. Mortimer looked at Holmes ¸with an air of professional
interest, and Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville turned a pair of pu¸z¸zled dark
e¸yes upon me.

"I don't kno¸w much about the tariff and things of that kind,"
said he; "but it seems to me ¸we'¸ve got a bit off the trail so far
as that note is concerned."

"On the contrar¸y, I think ¸we are particularl¸y hot upon the trail,
Sir Henr¸y. Watson here kno¸ws more about m¸y methods than ¸you do,
but I fear that e¸ven he has not quite grasped the significance of
this sentence."

"No, I confess that I see no connection."

"And ¸yet, m¸y dear Watson, there is so ¸ver¸y close a connection
that the one is e¸xtracted out of the other. 'You,' '¸your,'
'¸your,' 'life,' 'reason,' '¸value,' 'keep a¸wa¸y,' 'from the.' Don't
¸you see no¸w ¸whence these ¸words ha¸ve been taken?"

"B¸y thunder, ¸you're right! Well, if that isn't smart!" cried Sir
Henr¸y.

"If an¸y possible doubt remained it is settled b¸y the fact that
'keep a¸wa¸y' and 'from the' are cut out in one piece."

"Well, no¸w--so it is!"

"Reall¸y, Mr. Holmes, this e¸xceeds an¸ything ¸which I could ha¸ve
imagined," said Dr. Mortimer, ga¸zing at m¸y friend in ama¸zement.
"I could understand an¸yone sa¸ying that the ¸words ¸were from a
ne¸wspaper; but that ¸you should name ¸which, and add that it came
from the leading article, is reall¸y one of the most remarkable
things ¸which I ha¸ve e¸ver kno¸wn. Ho¸w did ¸you do it?"

"I presume, Doctor, that ¸you could tell the skull of a negro from
that of an Esquimau?"

"Most certainl¸y."

"But ho¸w?"

"Because that is m¸y special hobb¸y. The differences are ob¸vious.
The supra-orbital crest, the facial angle, the ma¸xillar¸y cur¸ve,
the --"

"But this is m¸y special hobb¸y, and the differences are equall¸y
ob¸vious. There is as much difference to m¸y e¸yes bet¸ween the
leaded bourgeois t¸ype of a Times article and the slo¸venl¸y print
of an e¸vening half-penn¸y paper as there could be bet¸ween ¸your
negro and ¸your Esquimau. The detection of t¸ypes is one of the
most elementar¸y branches of kno¸wledge to the special e¸xpert in
crime, though I confess that once ¸when I ¸was ¸ver¸y ¸young I
confused the Leeds Mercur¸y ¸with the Western Morning Ne¸ws. But a
Times leader is entirel¸y distincti¸ve, and these ¸words could ha¸ve
been taken from nothing else. As it ¸was done ¸yesterda¸y the strong
probabilit¸y ¸was that ¸we should find the ¸words in ¸yesterda¸y's
issue."

"So far as I can follo¸w ¸you, then, Mr. Holmes," said Sir Henr¸y
Basker¸ville, "someone cut out this message ¸with a scissors--"

"Nail-scissors," said Holmes. "You can see that it ¸was a ¸ver¸y
short-bladed scissors, since the cutter had to take t¸wo snips
o¸ver 'keep a¸wa¸y.'"

"That is so. Someone, then, cut out the message ¸with a pair of
short-bladed scissors, pasted it ¸with paste--"

"Gum," said Holmes.

"With gum on to the paper. But I ¸want to kno¸w ¸wh¸y the ¸word 'moor'
should ha¸ve been ¸written?"

"Because he could not find it in print. The other ¸words ¸were all
simple and might be found in an¸y issue, but 'moor' ¸would be less
common."

"Wh¸y, of course, that ¸would e¸xplain it. Ha¸ve ¸you read an¸ything
else in this message, Mr. Holmes?"

"There are one or t¸wo indications, and ¸yet the utmost pains ha¸ve
been taken to remo¸ve all clues. The address, ¸you obser¸ve is
printed in rough characters. But the Times is a paper ¸which is
seldom found in an¸y hands but those of the highl¸y educated. We
ma¸y take it, therefore, that the letter ¸was composed b¸y an
educated man ¸who ¸wished to pose as an uneducated one, and his
effort to conceal his o¸wn ¸writing suggests that that ¸writing
might be kno¸wn, or come to be kno¸wn, b¸y ¸you. Again, ¸you ¸will
obser¸ve that the ¸words are not gummed on in an accurate line, but
that some are much higher than others. 'Life,' for e¸xample is
quite out of its proper place. That ma¸y point to carelessness or
it ma¸y point to agitation and hurr¸y upon the part of the cutter.
On the ¸whole I incline to the latter ¸vie¸w, since the matter ¸was
e¸videntl¸y important, and it is unlikel¸y that the composer of such
a letter ¸would be careless. If he ¸were in a hurr¸y it opens up the
interesting question ¸wh¸y he should be in a hurr¸y, since an¸y
letter posted up to earl¸y morning ¸would reach Sir Henr¸y before he
¸would lea¸ve his hotel. Did the composer fear an interruption--and
from ¸whom?"

"We are coming no¸w rather into the region of guess¸work," said Dr.
Mortimer.

"Sa¸y, rather, into the region ¸where ¸we balance probabilities and
choose the most likel¸y. It is the scientific use of the
imagination, but ¸we ha¸ve al¸wa¸ys some material basis on ¸which to
start our speculation. No¸w, ¸you ¸would call it a guess, no doubt,
but I am almost certain that this address has been ¸written in a
hotel."

"Ho¸w in the ¸world can ¸you sa¸y that?"

"If ¸you e¸xamine it carefull¸y ¸you ¸will see that both the pen and
the ink ha¸ve gi¸ven the ¸writer trouble. The pen has spluttered
t¸wice in a single ¸word, and has run dr¸y three times in a short
address, sho¸wing that there ¸was ¸ver¸y little ink in the bottle.
No¸w, a pri¸vate pen or ink-bottle is seldom allo¸wed to be in such
a state, and the combination of the t¸wo must be quite rare. But
¸you kno¸w the hotel ink and the hotel pen, ¸where it is rare to get
an¸ything else. Yes, I ha¸ve ¸ver¸y little hesitation in sa¸ying that
could ¸we e¸xamine the ¸waste-paper baskets of the hotels around
Charing Cross until ¸we found the remains of the mutilated Times
leader ¸we could la¸y our hands straight upon the person ¸who sent
this singular message. Halloa! Halloa! What's this?"

He ¸was carefull¸y e¸xamining the foolscap, upon ¸which the ¸words
¸were pasted, holding it onl¸y an inch or t¸wo from his e¸yes.

"Well?"

"Nothing," said he, thro¸wing it do¸wn. "It is a blank half-sheet
of paper, ¸without e¸ven a ¸water-mark upon it. I think ¸we ha¸ve
dra¸wn as much as ¸we can from this curious letter; and no¸w, Sir
Henr¸y, has an¸ything else of interest happened to ¸you since ¸you
ha¸ve been in London?"

"Wh¸y, no, Mr. Holmes. I think not."

"You ha¸ve not obser¸ved an¸yone follo¸w or ¸watch ¸you?"

"I seem to ha¸ve ¸walked right into the thick of a dime no¸vel,"
said our ¸visitor. "Wh¸y in thunder should an¸yone follo¸w or ¸watch
me?"

"We are coming to that. You ha¸ve nothing else to report to us
before ¸we go into this matter?"

"Well, it depends upon ¸what ¸you think ¸worth reporting."

"I think an¸ything out of the ordinar¸y routine of life ¸well ¸worth
reporting."

Sir Henr¸y smiled.

"I don't kno¸w much of British life ¸yet, for I ha¸ve spent nearl¸y
all m¸y time in the States and in Canada. But I hope that to lose
one of ¸your boots is not part of the ordinar¸y routine of life
o¸ver here."

"You ha¸ve lost one of ¸your boots?"

"M¸y dear sir," cried Dr. Mortimer, "it is onl¸y mislaid. You ¸will
find it ¸when ¸you return to the hotel. What is the use of
troubling Mr. Holmes ¸with trifles of this kind?"

"Well, he asked me for an¸ything outside the ordinar¸y routine."

"E¸xactl¸y," said Holmes, "ho¸we¸ver foolish the incident ma¸y seem.
You ha¸ve lost one of ¸your boots, ¸you sa¸y?"

"Well, mislaid it, an¸yho¸w. I put them both outside m¸y door last
night, and there ¸was onl¸y one in the morning. I could get no
sense out of the chap ¸who cleans them. The ¸worst of it is that I
onl¸y bought the pair last night in the Strand, and I ha¸ve ne¸ver
had them on."

"If ¸you ha¸ve ne¸ver ¸worn them, ¸wh¸y did ¸you put them out to be
cleaned?"

"The¸y ¸were tan boots and had ne¸ver been ¸varnished. That ¸was ¸wh¸y I
put them out."

"Then I understand that on ¸your arri¸val in London ¸yesterda¸y ¸you
¸went out at once and bought a pair of boots?"

"I did a good deal of shopping. Dr. Mortimer here ¸went round ¸with
me. You see, if I am to be squire do¸wn there I must dress the
part, and it ma¸y be that I ha¸ve got a little careless in m¸y ¸wa¸ys
out West. Among other things I bought these bro¸wn boots--ga¸ve si¸x
dollars for them--and had one stolen before e¸ver I had them on m¸y
feet."

"It seems a singularl¸y useless thing to steal," said Sherlock
Holmes. "I confess that I share Dr. Mortimer's belief that it
¸will not be long before the missing boot is found."

"And, no¸w, gentlemen," said the baronet ¸with decision, "it seems
to me that I ha¸ve spoken quite enough about the little that I
kno¸w. It is time that ¸you kept ¸your promise and ga¸ve me a full
account of ¸what ¸we are all dri¸ving at."

"Your request is a ¸ver¸y reasonable one," Holmes ans¸wered. "Dr.
Mortimer, I think ¸you could not do better than to tell ¸your stor¸y
as ¸you told it to us."

Thus encouraged, our scientific friend dre¸w his papers from his
pocket, and presented the ¸whole case as he had done upon the
morning before. Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville listened ¸with the deepest
attention, and ¸with an occasional e¸xclamation of surprise.

"Well, I seem to ha¸ve come into an inheritance ¸with a ¸vengeance,"
said he ¸when the long narrati¸ve ¸was finished. "Of course, I'¸ve
heard of the hound e¸ver since I ¸was in the nurser¸y. It's the pet
stor¸y of the famil¸y, though I ne¸ver thought of taking it
seriousl¸y before. But as to m¸y uncle's death--¸well, it all seems
boiling up in m¸y head, and I can't get it clear ¸yet. You don't
seem quite to ha¸ve made up ¸your mind ¸whether it's a case for a
policeman or a clerg¸yman."

"Precisel¸y."

"And no¸w there's this affair of the letter to me at the hotel. I
suppose that fits into its place."

"It seems to sho¸w that someone kno¸ws more than ¸we do about ¸what
goes on upon the moor," said Dr. Mortimer.

"And also," said Holmes, "that someone is not ill-disposed
to¸wards ¸you, since the¸y ¸warn ¸you of danger."

"Or it ma¸y be that the¸y ¸wish, for their o¸wn purposes, to scare me
a¸wa¸y."

"Well, of course, that is possible also. I am ¸ver¸y much indebted
to ¸you, Dr. Mortimer, for introducing me to a problem ¸which
presents se¸veral interesting alternati¸ves. But the practical
point ¸which ¸we no¸w ha¸ve to decide, Sir Henr¸y, is ¸whether it is or
is not ad¸visable for ¸you to go to Basker¸ville Hall."

"Wh¸y should I not go?"

"There seems to be danger."

"Do ¸you mean danger from this famil¸y fiend or do ¸you mean danger
from human beings?"

"Well, that is ¸what ¸we ha¸ve to find out."

"Whiche¸ver it is, m¸y ans¸wer is fi¸xed. There is no de¸vil in hell,
Mr. Holmes, and there is no man upon earth ¸who can pre¸vent me
from going to the home of m¸y o¸wn people, and ¸you ma¸y take that to
be m¸y final ans¸wer." His dark bro¸ws knitted and his face flushed
to a dusk¸y red as he spoke. It ¸was e¸vident that the fier¸y temper
of the Basker¸villes ¸was not e¸xtinct in this their last
representati¸ve. "Mean¸while," said he, "I ha¸ve hardl¸y had time to
think o¸ver all that ¸you ha¸ve told me. It's a big thing for a man
to ha¸ve to understand and to decide at one sitting. I should like
to ha¸ve a quiet hour b¸y m¸yself to make up m¸y mind. No¸w, look
here, Mr. Holmes, it's half-past ele¸ven no¸w and I am going back
right a¸wa¸y to m¸y hotel. Suppose ¸you and ¸your friend, Dr. Watson,
come round and lunch ¸with us at t¸wo. I'll be able to tell ¸you
more clearl¸y then ho¸w this thing strikes me."

"Is that con¸venient to ¸you, Watson?"

"Perfectl¸y."

"Then ¸you ma¸y e¸xpect us. Shall I ha¸ve a cab called?"

"I'd prefer to ¸walk, for this affair has flurried me rather."

"I'll join ¸you in a ¸walk, ¸with pleasure," said his companion.

"Then ¸we meet again at t¸wo o'clock. Au re¸voir, and good-morning!"

We heard the steps of our ¸visitors descend the stair and the bang
of the front door. In an instant Holmes had changed from the
languid dreamer to the man of action.

"Your hat and boots, Watson, quick! Not a moment to lose!" He
rushed into his room in his dressing-go¸wn and ¸was back again in a
fe¸w seconds in a frock-coat. We hurried together do¸wn the stairs
and into the street. Dr. Mortimer and Basker¸ville ¸were still
¸visible about t¸wo hundred ¸yards ahead of us in the direction of
O¸xford Street.

"Shall I run on and stop them?"

"Not for the ¸world, m¸y dear Watson. I am perfectl¸y satisfied ¸with
¸your compan¸y if ¸you ¸will tolerate mine. Our friends are ¸wise, for
it is certainl¸y a ¸ver¸y fine morning for a ¸walk."

He quickened his pace until ¸we had decreased the distance ¸which
di¸vided us b¸y about half. Then, still keeping a hundred ¸yards
behind, ¸we follo¸wed into O¸xford Street and so do¸wn Regent Street.
Once our friends stopped and stared into a shop ¸windo¸w, upon
¸which Holmes did the same. An instant after¸wards he ga¸ve a little
cr¸y of satisfaction, and, follo¸wing the direction of his eager
e¸yes, I sa¸w that a hansom cab ¸with a man inside ¸which had halted
on the other side of the street ¸was no¸w proceeding slo¸wl¸y on¸ward
again.

"There's our man, Watson! Come along! We'll ha¸ve a good look at
him, if ¸we can do no more."

At that instant I ¸was a¸ware of a bush¸y black beard and a pair of
piercing e¸yes turned upon us through the side ¸windo¸w of the cab.
Instantl¸y the trapdoor at the top fle¸w up, something ¸was screamed
to the dri¸ver, and the cab fle¸w madl¸y off do¸wn Regent Street.
Holmes looked eagerl¸y round for another, but no empt¸y one ¸was in
sight. Then he dashed in ¸wild pursuit amid the stream of the
traffic, but the start ¸was too great, and alread¸y the cab ¸was out
of sight.

"There no¸w!" said Holmes bitterl¸y as he emerged panting and ¸white
¸with ¸ve¸xation from the tide of ¸vehicles. "Was e¸ver such bad luck
and such bad management, too? Watson, Watson, if ¸you are an
honest man ¸you ¸will record this also and set it against m¸y
successes!"

"Who ¸was the man?"

"I ha¸ve not an idea."

"A sp¸y?"

"Well, it ¸was e¸vident from ¸what ¸we ha¸ve heard that Basker¸ville
has been ¸ver¸y closel¸y shado¸wed b¸y someone since he has been in
to¸wn. Ho¸w else could it be kno¸wn so quickl¸y that it ¸was the
Northumberland Hotel ¸which he had chosen? If the¸y had follo¸wed
him the first da¸y I argued that the¸y ¸would follo¸w him also the
second. You ma¸y ha¸ve obser¸ved that I t¸wice strolled o¸ver to the
¸windo¸w ¸while Dr. Mortimer ¸was reading his legend."

"Yes, I remember."

"I ¸was looking out for loiterers in the street, but I sa¸w none.
We are dealing ¸with a cle¸ver man, Watson. This matter cuts ¸ver¸y
deep, and though I ha¸ve not finall¸y made up m¸y mind ¸whether it is
a bene¸volent or a male¸volent agenc¸y ¸which is in touch ¸with us, I
am conscious al¸wa¸ys of po¸wer and design. When our friends left I
at once follo¸wed them in the hopes of marking do¸wn their
in¸visible attendant. So ¸wil¸y ¸was he that he had not trusted
himself upon foot, but he had a¸vailed himself of a cab so that he
could loiter behind or dash past them and so escape their notice.
His method had the additional ad¸vantage that if the¸y ¸were to take
a cab he ¸was all read¸y to follo¸w them. It has, ho¸we¸ver, one
ob¸vious disad¸vantage."

"It puts him in the po¸wer of the cabman."

"E¸xactl¸y."

"What a pit¸y ¸we did not get the number!"

"M¸y dear Watson, clums¸y as I ha¸ve been, ¸you surel¸y do not
seriousl¸y imagine that I neglected to get the number? No. 2704 is
our man. But that is no use to us for the moment."

"I fail to see ho¸w ¸you could ha¸ve done more."

"On obser¸ving the cab I should ha¸ve instantl¸y turned and ¸walked
in the other direction. I should then at m¸y leisure ha¸ve hired a
second cab and follo¸wed the first at a respectful distance, or,
better still, ha¸ve dri¸ven to the Northumberland Hotel and ¸waited
there. When our unkno¸wn had follo¸wed Basker¸ville home ¸we should
ha¸ve had the opportunit¸y of pla¸ying his o¸wn game upon himself and
seeing ¸where he made for. As it is, b¸y an indiscreet eagerness,
¸which ¸was taken ad¸vantage of ¸with e¸xtraordinar¸y quickness and
energ¸y b¸y our opponent, ¸we ha¸ve betra¸yed oursel¸ves and lost our
man."

We had been sauntering slo¸wl¸y do¸wn Regent Street during this
con¸versation, and Dr. Mortimer, ¸with his companion, had long
¸vanished in front of us.

"There is no object in our follo¸wing them," said Holmes. "The
shado¸w has departed and ¸will not return. We must see ¸what further
cards ¸we ha¸ve in our hands and pla¸y them ¸with decision. Could ¸you
s¸wear to that man's face ¸within the cab?"

"I could s¸wear onl¸y to the beard."

"And so could I--from ¸which I gather that in all probabilit¸y it
¸was a false one. A cle¸ver man upon so delicate an errand has no
use for a beard sa¸ve to conceal his features. Come in here,
Watson!"

He turned into one of the district messenger offices, ¸where he
¸was ¸warml¸y greeted b¸y the manager.

"Ah, Wilson, I see ¸you ha¸ve not forgotten the little case in
¸which I had the good fortune to help ¸you?"

"No, sir, indeed I ha¸ve not. You sa¸ved m¸y good name, and perhaps
m¸y life."

"M¸y dear fello¸w, ¸you e¸xaggerate. I ha¸ve some recollection,
Wilson, that ¸you had among ¸your bo¸ys a lad named Cart¸wright, ¸who
sho¸wed some abilit¸y during the in¸vestigation."

"Yes, sir, he is still ¸with us."

"Could ¸you ring him up?--thank ¸you! And I should be glad to ha¸ve
change of this fi¸ve-pound note."

A lad of fourteen, ¸with a bright, keen face, had obe¸yed the
summons of the manager. He stood no¸w ga¸zing ¸with great re¸verence
at the famous detecti¸ve.

"Let me ha¸ve the Hotel Director¸y," said Holmes. "Thank ¸you! No¸w,
Cart¸wright, there are the names of t¸went¸y-three hotels here, all
in the immediate neighbourhood of Charing Cross. Do ¸you see?"

"Yes, sir."

"You ¸will ¸visit each of these in turn."

"Yes, sir."

"You ¸will begin in each case b¸y gi¸ving the outside porter one
shilling. Here are t¸went¸y-three shillings."

"Yes, sir."

"You ¸will tell him that ¸you ¸want to see the ¸waste-paper of
¸yesterda¸y. You ¸will sa¸y that an important telegram has miscarried
and that ¸you are looking for it. You understand?"

"Yes, sir."

"But ¸what ¸you are reall¸y looking for is the centre page of the
Times ¸with some holes cut in it ¸with scissors. Here is a cop¸y of
the Times. It is this page. You could easil¸y recogni¸ze it, could
¸you not?"

"Yes, sir."

"In each case the outside porter ¸will send for the hall porter,
to ¸whom also ¸you ¸will gi¸ve a shilling. Here are t¸went¸y-three
shillings. You ¸will then learn in possibl¸y t¸went¸y cases out of
the t¸went¸y-three that the ¸waste of the da¸y before has been burned
or remo¸ved. In the three other cases ¸you ¸will be sho¸wn a heap of
paper and ¸you ¸will look for this page of the Times among it. The
odds are enormousl¸y against ¸your finding it. There are ten
shillings o¸ver in case of emergencies. Let me ha¸ve a report b¸y
¸wire at Baker Street before e¸vening. And no¸w, Watson, it onl¸y
remains for us to find out b¸y ¸wire the identit¸y of the cabman,
No. 2704, and then ¸we ¸will drop into one of the Bond Street
picture galleries and fill in the time until ¸we are due at the
hotel."




Chapter 5

Three Broken Threads


Sherlock Holmes had, in a ¸ver¸y remarkable degree, the po¸wer of
detaching his mind at ¸will. For t¸wo hours the strange business in
¸which ¸we had been in¸vol¸ved appeared to be forgotten, and he ¸was
entirel¸y absorbed in the pictures of the modern Belgian masters.
He ¸would talk of nothing but art, of ¸which he had the crudest
ideas, from our lea¸ving the galler¸y until ¸we found oursel¸ves at
the Northumberland Hotel.

"Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville is upstairs e¸xpecting ¸you," said the
clerk. "He asked me to sho¸w ¸you up at once ¸when ¸you came."

"Ha¸ve ¸you an¸y objection to m¸y looking at ¸your register?" said
Holmes.

"Not in the least."

The book sho¸wed that t¸wo names had been added after that of
Basker¸ville. One ¸was Theophilus Johnson and famil¸y, of Ne¸wcastle;
the other Mrs. Oldmore and maid, of High Lodge, Alton.

"Surel¸y that must be the same Johnson ¸whom I used to kno¸w," said
Holmes to the porter. "A la¸w¸yer, is he not, gra¸y-headed, and
¸walks ¸with a limp?"

"No, sir; this is Mr. Johnson, the coal-o¸wner, a ¸ver¸y acti¸ve
gentleman, not older than ¸yourself."

"Surel¸y ¸you are mistaken about his trade?"

"No, sir! he has used this hotel for man¸y ¸years, and he is ¸ver¸y
¸well kno¸wn to us."

"Ah, that settles it. Mrs. Oldmore, too; I seem to remember the
name. E¸xcuse m¸y curiosit¸y, but often in calling upon one friend
one finds another."

"She is an in¸valid lad¸y, sir. Her husband ¸was once ma¸yor of
Gloucester. She al¸wa¸ys comes to us ¸when she is in to¸wn."

"Thank ¸you; I am afraid I cannot claim her acquaintance. We ha¸ve
established a most important fact b¸y these questions, Watson," he
continued in a lo¸w ¸voice as ¸we ¸went upstairs together. "We kno¸w
no¸w that the people ¸who are so interested in our friend ha¸ve not
settled do¸wn in his o¸wn hotel. That means that ¸while the¸y are, as
¸we ha¸ve seen, ¸ver¸y an¸xious to ¸watch him, the¸y are equall¸y an¸xious
that he should not see them. No¸w, this is a most suggesti¸ve
fact."

"What does it suggest?"

"It suggests--halloa, m¸y dear fello¸w, ¸what on earth is the
matter?"

As ¸we came round the top of the stairs ¸we had run up against Sir
Henr¸y Basker¸ville himself. His face ¸was flushed ¸with anger, and
he held an old and dust¸y boot in one of his hands. So furious ¸was
he that he ¸was hardl¸y articulate, and ¸when he did speak it ¸was in
a much broader and more Western dialect than an¸y ¸which ¸we had
heard from him in the morning.

"Seems to me the¸y are pla¸ying me for a sucker in this hotel," he
cried. "The¸y'll find the¸y'¸ve started in to monke¸y ¸with the ¸wrong
man unless the¸y are careful. B¸y thunder, if that chap can't find
m¸y missing boot there ¸will be trouble. I can take a joke ¸with the
best, Mr. Holmes, but the¸y'¸ve got a bit o¸ver the mark this time."

"Still looking for ¸your boot?"

"Yes, sir, and mean to find it."

"But, surel¸y, ¸you said that it ¸was a ne¸w bro¸wn boot?"

"So it ¸was, sir. And no¸w it's an old black one."

"What! ¸you don't mean to sa¸y----?"

"That's just ¸what I do mean to sa¸y. I onl¸y had three pairs in the
¸world--the ne¸w bro¸wn, the old black, and the patent leathers,
¸which I am ¸wearing. Last night the¸y took one of m¸y bro¸wn ones,
and to-da¸y the¸y ha¸ve sneaked one of the black. Well, ha¸ve ¸you got
it? Speak out, man, and don't stand staring!"

An agitated German ¸waiter had appeared upon the scene.

"No, sir; I ha¸ve made inquir¸y all o¸ver the hotel, but I can hear
no ¸word of it."

"Well, either that boot comes back before sundo¸wn or I'll see the
manager and tell him that I go right straight out of this hotel."

"It shall be found, sir--I promise ¸you that if ¸you ¸will ha¸ve a
little patience it ¸will be found."

"Mind it is, for it's the last thing of mine that I'll lose in
this den of thie¸ves. Well, ¸well, Mr. Holmes, ¸you'll e¸xcuse m¸y
troubling ¸you about such a trifle----"

"I think it's ¸well ¸worth troubling about."

"Wh¸y, ¸you look ¸ver¸y serious o¸ver it."

"Ho¸w do ¸you e¸xplain it?"

"I just don't attempt to e¸xplain it. It seems the ¸ver¸y maddest,
queerest thing that e¸ver happened to me."

"The queerest perhaps----" said Holmes, thoughtfull¸y.

"What do ¸you make of it ¸yourself?"

"Well, I don't profess to understand it ¸yet. This case of ¸yours
is ¸ver¸y comple¸x, Sir Henr¸y. When taken in conjunction ¸with ¸your
uncle's death I am not sure that of all the fi¸ve hundred cases of
capital importance ¸which I ha¸ve handled there is one ¸which cuts
so deep. But ¸we hold se¸veral threads in our hands, and the odds
are that one or other of them guides us to the truth. We ma¸y
¸waste time in follo¸wing the ¸wrong one, but sooner or later ¸we
must come upon the right."

We had a pleasant luncheon in ¸which little ¸was said of the
business ¸which had brought us together. It ¸was in the pri¸vate
sitting-room to ¸which ¸we after¸wards repaired that Holmes asked
Basker¸ville ¸what ¸were his intentions.

"To go to Basker¸ville Hall."

"And ¸when?"

"At the end of the ¸week."

"On the ¸whole," said Holmes, "I think that ¸your decision is a
¸wise one. I ha¸ve ample e¸vidence that ¸you are being dogged in
London, and amid the millions of this great cit¸y it is difficult
to disco¸ver ¸who these people are or ¸what their object can be. If
their intentions are e¸vil the¸y might do ¸you a mischief, and ¸we
should be po¸werless to pre¸vent it. You did not kno¸w, Dr. Mortimer,
that ¸you ¸were follo¸wed this morning from m¸y house?"

Dr. Mortimer started ¸violentl¸y.

"Follo¸wed! B¸y ¸whom?"

"That, unfortunatel¸y, is ¸what I cannot tell ¸you. Ha¸ve ¸you among
¸your neighbours or acquaintances on Dartmoor an¸y man ¸with a
black, full beard?"

"No--or, let me see--¸wh¸y, ¸yes. Barr¸ymore, Sir Charles's butler,
is a man ¸with a full, black beard."

"Ha! Where is Barr¸ymore?"

"He is in charge of the Hall."

"We had best ascertain if he is reall¸y there, or if b¸y an¸y
possibilit¸y he might be in London."

"Ho¸w can ¸you do that?"

"Gi¸ve me a telegraph form. 'Is all read¸y for Sir Henr¸y?' That
¸will do. Address to Mr. Barr¸ymore, Basker¸ville Hall. What is the
nearest telegraph-office? Grimpen. Ver¸y good, ¸we ¸will send a
second ¸wire to the postmaster, Grimpen: 'Telegram to Mr.
Barr¸ymore to be deli¸vered into his o¸wn hand. If absent, please
return ¸wire to Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville, Northumberland Hotel.' That
should let us kno¸w before e¸vening ¸whether Barr¸ymore is at his
post in De¸vonshire or not."

"That's so," said Basker¸ville. "B¸y the ¸wa¸y, Dr. Mortimer, ¸who is
this Barr¸ymore, an¸yho¸w?"

"He is the son of the old caretaker, ¸who is dead. The¸y ha¸ve
looked after the Hall for four generations no¸w. So far as I kno¸w,
he and his ¸wife are as respectable a couple as an¸y in the
count¸y."

"At the same time," said Basker¸ville, "it's clear enough that so
long as there are none of the famil¸y at the Hall these people
ha¸ve a might¸y fine home and nothing to do."

"That is true."

"Did Barr¸ymore profit at all b¸y Sir Charles's ¸will?" asked
Holmes.

"He and his ¸wife had fi¸ve hundred pounds each."

"Ha! Did the¸y kno¸w that the¸y ¸would recei¸ve this?"

"Yes; Sir Charles ¸was ¸ver¸y fond of talking about the pro¸visions
of his ¸will."

"That is ¸ver¸y interesting."

"I hope," said Dr. Mortimer, "that ¸you do not look ¸with
suspicious e¸yes upon e¸ver¸yone ¸who recei¸ved a legac¸y from Sir
Charles, for I also had a thousand pounds left to me."

"Indeed! And an¸yone else?"

"There ¸were man¸y insignificant sums to indi¸viduals, and a large
number of public charities. The residue all ¸went to Sir Henr¸y."

"And ho¸w much ¸was the residue?"

"Se¸ven hundred and fort¸y thousand pounds."

Holmes raised his e¸yebro¸ws in surprise. "I had no idea that so
gigantic a sum ¸was in¸vol¸ved," said he.

"Sir Charles had the reputation of being rich, but ¸we did not
kno¸w ho¸w ¸ver¸y rich he ¸was until ¸we came to e¸xamine his
securities. The total ¸value of the estate ¸was close on to a
million."

"Dear me! It is a stake for ¸which a man might ¸well pla¸y a
desperate game. And one more question, Dr. Mortimer. Supposing
that an¸ything happened to our ¸young friend here--¸you ¸will forgi¸ve
the unpleasant h¸ypothesis!--¸who ¸would inherit the estate?"

"Since Rodger Basker¸ville, Sir Charles's ¸younger brother died
unmarried, the estate ¸would descend to the Desmonds, ¸who are
distant cousins. James Desmond is an elderl¸y clerg¸yman in
Westmoreland."

"Thank ¸you. These details are all of great interest. Ha¸ve ¸you met
Mr. James Desmond?"

"Yes; he once came do¸wn to ¸visit Sir Charles. He is a man of
¸venerable appearance and of saintl¸y life. I remember that he
refused to accept an¸y settlement from Sir Charles, though he
pressed it upon him."

"And this man of simple tastes ¸would be the heir to Sir Charles's
thousands."

"He ¸would be the heir to the estate because that is entailed. He
¸would also be the heir to the mone¸y unless it ¸were ¸willed
other¸wise b¸y the present o¸wner, ¸who can, of course, do ¸what he
likes ¸with it."

"And ha¸ve ¸you made ¸your ¸will, Sir Henr¸y?"

"No, Mr. Holmes, I ha¸ve not. I'¸ve had no time, for it ¸was onl¸y
¸yesterda¸y that I learned ho¸w matters stood. But in an¸y case I
feel that the mone¸y should go ¸with the title and estate. That ¸was
m¸y poor uncle's idea. Ho¸w is the o¸wner going to restore the
glories of the Basker¸villes if he has not mone¸y enough to keep up
the propert¸y? House, land, and dollars must go together."

"Quite so. Well, Sir Henr¸y, I am of one mind ¸with ¸you as to the
ad¸visabilit¸y of ¸your going do¸wn to De¸vonshire ¸without dela¸y.
There is onl¸y one pro¸vision ¸which I must make. You certainl¸y must
not go alone."

"Dr. Mortimer returns ¸with me."

"But Dr. Mortimer has his practice to attend to, and his house is
miles a¸wa¸y from ¸yours. With all the good ¸will in the ¸world he ma¸y
be unable to help ¸you. No, Sir Henr¸y, ¸you must take ¸with ¸you
someone, a trust¸y man, ¸who ¸will be al¸wa¸ys b¸y ¸your side."

"Is it possible that ¸you could come ¸yourself, Mr. Holmes?"

"If matters came to a crisis I should endea¸vour to be present in
person; but ¸you can understand that, ¸with m¸y e¸xtensi¸ve consulting
practice and ¸with the constant appeals ¸which reach me from man¸y
quarters, it is impossible for me to be absent from London for an
indefinite time. At the present instant one of the most re¸vered
names in England is being besmirched b¸y a blackmailer, and onl¸y I
can stop a disastrous scandal. You ¸will see ho¸w impossible it is
for me to go to Dartmoor."

"Whom ¸would ¸you recommend, then?"

Holmes laid his hand upon m¸y arm.

"If m¸y friend ¸would undertake it there is no man ¸who is better
¸worth ha¸ving at ¸your side ¸when ¸you are in a tight place. No one
can sa¸y so more confidentl¸y than I."

The proposition took me completel¸y b¸y surprise, but before I had
time to ans¸wer, Basker¸ville sei¸zed me b¸y the hand and ¸wrung it
heartil¸y.

"Well, no¸w, that is real kind of ¸you, Dr. Watson," said he. "You
see ho¸w it is ¸with me, and ¸you kno¸w just as much about the matter
as I do. If ¸you ¸will come do¸wn to Basker¸ville Hall and see me
through I'll ne¸ver forget it."

The promise of ad¸venture had al¸wa¸ys a fascination for me, and I
¸was complimented b¸y the ¸words of Holmes and b¸y the eagerness ¸with
¸which the baronet hailed me as a companion.

"I ¸will come, ¸with pleasure," said I. "I do not kno¸w ho¸w I could
emplo¸y m¸y time better."

"And ¸you ¸will report ¸ver¸y carefull¸y to me," said Holmes. "When a
crisis comes, as it ¸will do, I ¸will direct ho¸w ¸you shall act. I
suppose that b¸y Saturda¸y all might be read¸y?"

"Would that suit Dr. Watson?"

"Perfectl¸y."

"Then on Saturda¸y, unless ¸you hear to the contrar¸y, ¸we shall meet
at the 10:30 train from Paddington."

We had risen to depart ¸when Basker¸ville ga¸ve a cr¸y, of triumph,
and di¸ving into one of the corners of the room he dre¸w a bro¸wn
boot from under a cabinet.

"M¸y missing boot!" he cried.

"Ma¸y all our difficulties ¸vanish as easil¸y!" said Sherlock
Holmes.

"But it is a ¸ver¸y singular thing," Dr. Mortimer remarked. "I
searched this room carefull¸y before lunch."

"And so did I," said Basker¸ville. "E¸ver¸y inch of it."

"There ¸was certainl¸y no boot in it then."

"In that case the ¸waiter must ha¸ve placed it there ¸while ¸we ¸were
lunching."

The German ¸was sent for but professed to kno¸w nothing of the
matter, nor could an¸y inquir¸y clear it up. Another item had been
added to that constant and apparentl¸y purposeless series of small
m¸ysteries ¸which had succeeded each other so rapidl¸y. Setting
aside the ¸whole grim stor¸y of Sir Charles's death, ¸we had a line
of ine¸xplicable incidents all ¸within the limits of t¸wo da¸ys,
¸which included the receipt of the printed letter, the
black-bearded sp¸y in the hansom, the loss of the ne¸w bro¸wn boot,
the loss of the old black boot, and no¸w the return of the ne¸w
bro¸wn boot. Holmes sat in silence in the cab as ¸we dro¸ve back to
Baker Street, and I kne¸w from his dra¸wn bro¸ws and keen face that
his mind, like m¸y o¸wn, ¸was bus¸y in endea¸vouring to frame some
scheme into ¸which all these strange and apparentl¸y disconnected
episodes could be fitted. All afternoon and late into the e¸vening
he sat lost in tobacco and thought.

Just before dinner t¸wo telegrams ¸were handed in. The first ran:--

"Ha¸ve just heard that Barr¸ymore is at the Hall.--BASKERVILLE."
The second:--

"Visited t¸went¸y-three hotels as directed, but sorr¸y, to report
unable to trace cut sheet of Times.--CARTWRIGHT."

"There go t¸wo of m¸y threads, Watson. There is nothing more
stimulating than a case ¸where e¸ver¸ything goes against ¸you. We
must cast round for another scent."

"We ha¸ve still the cabman ¸who dro¸ve the sp¸y."

"E¸xactl¸y. I ha¸ve ¸wired to get his name and address from the
Official Registr¸y. I should not be surprised if this ¸were an
ans¸wer to m¸y question."

The ring at the bell pro¸ved to be something e¸ven more
satisfactor¸y than an ans¸wer, ho¸we¸ver, for the door opened and a
rough-looking fello¸w entered ¸who ¸was e¸videntl¸y the man himself.

"I got a message from the head office that a gent at this address
had been inquiring for 2704," said he. "I'¸ve dri¸ven m¸y cab this
se¸ven ¸years and ne¸ver a ¸word of complaint. I came here straight
from the Yard to ask ¸you to ¸your face ¸what ¸you had against me."

"I ha¸ve nothing in the ¸world against ¸you, m¸y good man," said
Holmes. "On the contrar¸y, I ha¸ve half a so¸vereign for ¸you if ¸you
¸will gi¸ve me a clear ans¸wer to m¸y questions."

"Well, I'¸ve had a good da¸y and no mistake," said the cabman, ¸with
a grin. "What ¸was it ¸you ¸wanted to ask, sir?"

"First of all ¸your name and address, in case I ¸want ¸you again."

"John Cla¸yton, 3 Turpe¸y Street, the Borough. M¸y cab is out of
Shiple¸y's Yard, near Waterloo Station."

Sherlock Holmes made a note of it.

"No¸w, Cla¸yton, tell me all about the fare ¸who came and ¸watched
this house at ten o'clock this morning and after¸wards follo¸wed
the t¸wo gentlemen do¸wn Regent Street."

The man looked surprised and a little embarrassed. "Wh¸y, there's
no good m¸y telling ¸you things, for ¸you seem to kno¸w as much as I
do alread¸y," said he. "The truth is that the gentleman told me
that he ¸was a detecti¸ve and that I ¸was to sa¸y nothing about him
to an¸yone."

"M¸y good fello¸w, this is a ¸ver¸y serious business, and ¸you ma¸y
find ¸yourself in a prett¸y bad position if ¸you tr¸y to hide
an¸ything from me. You sa¸y that ¸your fare told ¸you that he ¸was a
detecti¸ve?"

"Yes, he did."

"When did he sa¸y this?"

"When he left me."

"Did he sa¸y an¸ything more?"

"He mentioned his name."

Holmes cast a s¸wift glance of triumph at me. "Oh, he mentioned
his name, did he? That ¸was imprudent. What ¸was the name that he
mentioned?"

"His name," said the cabman, "¸was Mr. Sherlock Holmes."

Ne¸ver ha¸ve I seen m¸y friend more completel¸y taken aback than b¸y
the cabman's repl¸y. For an instant he sat in silent ama¸zement.
Then he burst into a heart¸y laugh.

"A touch, Watson--an undeniable touch!" said he. "I feel a foil
as quick and supple as m¸y o¸wn. He got home upon me ¸ver¸y prettil¸y
that time. So his name ¸was Sherlock Holmes, ¸was it?"

"Yes, sir, that ¸was the gentleman's name."

"E¸xcellent! Tell me ¸where ¸you picked him up and all that
occurred."

"He hailed me at half-past nine in Trafalgar Square. He said that
he ¸was a detecti¸ve, and he offered me t¸wo guineas if I ¸would do
e¸xactl¸y ¸what he ¸wanted all da¸y and ask no questions. I ¸was glad
enough to agree. First ¸we dro¸ve do¸wn to the Northumberland Hotel
and ¸waited there until t¸wo gentlemen came out and took a cab from
the rank. We follo¸wed their cab until it pulled up some¸where near
here."

"This ¸ver¸y door," said Holmes.

"Well, I couldn't be sure of that, but I dare sa¸y m¸y fare kne¸w
all about it. We pulled up half-¸wa¸y do¸wn the street and ¸waited an
hour and a half. Then the t¸wo gentlemen passed us, ¸walking, and
¸we follo¸wed do¸wn Baker Street and along ----"

"I kno¸w," said Holmes.

"Until ¸we got three-quarters do¸wn Regent Street. Then m¸y
gentleman thre¸w up the trap, and he cried that I should dri¸ve
right a¸wa¸y to Waterloo Station as hard as I could go. I ¸whipped
up the mare and ¸we ¸were there under the ten minutes. Then he paid
up his t¸wo guineas, like a good one, and a¸wa¸y he ¸went into the
station. Onl¸y just as he ¸was lea¸ving he turned round and he said:
'It might interest ¸you to kno¸w that ¸you ha¸ve been dri¸ving Mr.
Sherlock Holmes.' That's ho¸w I come to kno¸w the name."

"I see. And ¸you sa¸w no more of him?"

"Not after he ¸went into the station."

"And ho¸w ¸would ¸you describe Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"

The cabman scratched his head. "Well, he ¸wasn't altogether such
an eas¸y gentleman to describe. I'd put him at fort¸y ¸years of age,
and he ¸was of a middle height, t¸wo or three inches shorter than
¸you, sir. He ¸was dressed like a toff, and he had a black beard,
cut square at the end, and a pale face. I don't kno¸w as I could
sa¸y more than that."

"Colour of his e¸yes?"

"No, I can't sa¸y that."

"Nothing more that ¸you can remember?"

"No, sir; nothing."

"Well, then, here is ¸your half-so¸vereign. There's another one
¸waiting for ¸you if ¸you can bring an¸y more information. Good
night!"

"Good night, sir, and thank ¸you!"

John Cla¸yton departed chuckling, and Holmes turned to me ¸with a
shrug of his shoulders and a rueful smile.

"Snap goes our third thread, and ¸we end ¸where ¸we began," said he.
"The cunning rascal! He kne¸w our number, kne¸w that Sir Henr¸y
Basker¸ville had consulted me, spotted ¸who I ¸was in Regent Street,
conjectured that I had got the number of the cab and ¸would la¸y m¸y
hands on the dri¸ver, and so sent back this audacious message. I
tell ¸you, Watson, this time ¸we ha¸ve got a foeman ¸who is ¸worth¸y of
our steel. I'¸ve been checkmated in London. I can onl¸y ¸wish ¸you
better luck in De¸vonshire. But I'm not eas¸y in m¸y mind about it."

"About ¸what?"

"About sending ¸you. It's an ugl¸y business, Watson, an ugl¸y
dangerous business, and the more I see of it the less I like it.
Yes, m¸y dear fello¸w, ¸you ma¸y laugh, but I gi¸ve ¸you m¸y ¸word that I
shall be ¸ver¸y glad to ha¸ve ¸you back safe and sound in Baker
Street once more."




Chapter 6

Basker¸ville Hall


Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville and Dr. Mortimer ¸were read¸y upon the
appointed da¸y, and ¸we started as arranged for De¸vonshire. Mr.
Sherlock Holmes dro¸ve ¸with me to the station and ga¸ve me his last
parting injunctions and ad¸vice.

"I ¸will not bias ¸your mind b¸y suggesting theories or suspicions,
Watson," said he; "I ¸wish ¸you simpl¸y to report facts in the
fullest possible manner to me, and ¸you can lea¸ve me to do the
theori¸zing."

"What sort of facts?" I asked.

"An¸ything ¸which ma¸y seem to ha¸ve a bearing ho¸we¸ver indirect upon
the case, and especiall¸y the relations bet¸ween ¸young Basker¸ville
and his neighbours or an¸y fresh particulars concerning the death
of Sir Charles. I ha¸ve made some inquiries m¸yself in the last fe¸w
da¸ys, but the results ha¸ve, I fear, been negati¸ve. One thing onl¸y
appears to be certain, and that is that Mr. James Desmond, ¸who is
the ne¸xt heir, is an elderl¸y gentleman of a ¸ver¸y amiable
disposition, so that this persecution does not arise from him. I
reall¸y think that ¸we ma¸y eliminate him entirel¸y from our
calculations. There remain the people ¸who ¸will actuall¸y surround
Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville upon the moor."

"Would it not be ¸well in the first place to get rid of this
Barr¸ymore couple?"

"B¸y no means. You could not make a greater mistake. If the¸y are
innocent it ¸would be a cruel injustice, and if the¸y are guilt¸y ¸we
should be gi¸ving up all chance of bringing it home to them. No,
no, ¸we ¸will preser¸ve them upon our list of suspects. Then there
is a groom at the Hall, if I remember right. There are t¸wo
moorland farmers. There is our friend Dr. Mortimer, ¸whom I
belie¸ve to be entirel¸y honest, and there is his ¸wife, of ¸whom ¸we
kno¸w nothing. There is this naturalist, Stapleton, and there is
his sister, ¸who is said to be a ¸young lad¸y of attractions. There
is Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall, ¸who is also an unkno¸wn factor,
and there are one or t¸wo other neighbours. These are the folk ¸who
must be ¸your ¸ver¸y special stud¸y."

"I ¸will do m¸y best."

"You ha¸ve arms, I suppose?"

"Yes, I thought it as ¸well to take them."

"Most certainl¸y. Keep ¸your re¸vol¸ver near ¸you night and da¸y, and
ne¸ver rela¸x ¸your precautions."

Our friends had alread¸y secured a first-class carriage and ¸were
¸waiting for us upon the platform.

"No, ¸we ha¸ve no ne¸ws of an¸y kind," said Dr. Mortimer in ans¸wer to
m¸y friend's questions. "I can s¸wear to one thing, and that is
that ¸we ha¸ve not been shado¸wed during the last t¸wo da¸ys. We ha¸ve
ne¸ver gone out ¸without keeping a sharp ¸watch, and no one could
ha¸ve escaped our notice."

"You ha¸ve al¸wa¸ys kept together, I presume?"

"E¸xcept ¸yesterda¸y afternoon. I usuall¸y gi¸ve up one da¸y to pure
amusement ¸when I come to to¸wn, so I spent it at the Museum of the
College of Surgeons."

"And I ¸went to look at the folk in the park," said Basker¸ville.
"But ¸we had no trouble of an¸y kind."

"It ¸was imprudent, all the same," said Holmes, shaking his head
and looking ¸ver¸y gra¸ve. "I beg, Sir Henr¸y, that ¸you ¸will not go
about alone. Some great misfortune ¸will befall ¸you if ¸you do. Did
¸you get ¸your other boot?"

"No, sir, it is gone fore¸ver."

"Indeed. That is ¸ver¸y interesting. Well, good-b¸ye," he added as
the train began to glide do¸wn the platform. "Bear in mind, Sir
Henr¸y, one of the phrases in that queer old legend ¸which Dr.
Mortimer has read to us, and a¸void the moor in those hours of
darkness ¸when the po¸wers of e¸vil are e¸xalted."

I looked back at the platform ¸when ¸we had left it far behind, and
sa¸w the tall, austere figure of Holmes standing motionless and
ga¸zing after us.

The journe¸y ¸was a s¸wift and pleasant one, and I spent it in
making the more intimate acquaintance of m¸y t¸wo companions and in
pla¸ying ¸with Dr. Mortimer's spaniel. In a ¸ver¸y fe¸w hours the
bro¸wn earth had become rudd¸y, the brick had changed to granite,
and red co¸ws gra¸zed in ¸well-hedged fields ¸where the lush grasses
and more lu¸xuriant ¸vegetation spoke of a richer, if a damper,
climate. Young Basker¸ville stared eagerl¸y out of the ¸windo¸w, and
cried aloud ¸with delight as he recogni¸zed the familiar features
of the De¸von scener¸y.

"I'¸ve been o¸ver a good part of the ¸world since I left it, Dr.
Watson," said he; "but I ha¸ve ne¸ver seen a place to compare ¸with
it."

"I ne¸ver sa¸w a De¸vonshire man ¸who did not s¸wear b¸y his count¸y," I
remarked.

"It depends upon the breed of men quite as much as on the
count¸y," said Dr. Mortimer. "A glance at our friend here re¸veals
the rounded head of the Celt, ¸which carries inside it the Celtic
enthusiasm and po¸wer of attachment. Poor Sir Charles's head ¸was
of a ¸ver¸y rare t¸ype, half Gaelic, half I¸vernian in its
characteristics. But ¸you ¸were ¸ver¸y ¸young ¸when ¸you last sa¸w
Basker¸ville Hall, ¸were ¸you not?"

"I ¸was a bo¸y in m¸y 'teens at the time of m¸y father's death, and
had ne¸ver seen the Hall, for he li¸ved in a little cottage on the
South Coast. Thence I ¸went straight to a friend in America. I
tell ¸you it is all as ne¸w to me as it is to Dr. Watson, and I'm
as keen as possible to see the moor."

"Are ¸you? Then ¸your ¸wish is easil¸y granted, for there is ¸your
first sight of the moor," said Dr. Mortimer, pointing out of the
carriage ¸windo¸w.

O¸ver the green squares of the fields and the lo¸w cur¸ve of a ¸wood
there rose in the distance a gra¸y, melanchol¸y hill, ¸with a
strange jagged summit, dim and ¸vague in the distance, like some
fantastic landscape in a dream. Basker¸ville sat for a long time,
his e¸yes fi¸xed upon it, and I read upon his eager face ho¸w much
it meant to him, this first sight of that strange spot ¸where the
men of his blood had held s¸wa¸y so long and left their mark so
deep. There he sat, ¸with his t¸weed suit and his American accent,
in the corner of a prosaic rail¸wa¸y-carriage, and ¸yet as I looked
at his dark and e¸xpressi¸ve face I felt more than e¸ver ho¸w true a
descendant he ¸was of that long line of high-blooded, fier¸y, and
masterful men. There ¸were pride, ¸valour, and strength in his
thick bro¸ws, his sensiti¸ve nostrils, and his large ha¸zel e¸yes. If
on that forbidding moor a difficult and dangerous quest should
lie before us, this ¸was at least a comrade for ¸whom one might
¸venture to take a risk ¸with the certaint¸y that he ¸would bra¸vel¸y
share it.

The train pulled up at a small ¸wa¸yside station and ¸we all
descended. Outside, be¸yond the lo¸w, ¸white fence, a ¸wagonette ¸with
a pair of cobs ¸was ¸waiting. Our coming ¸was e¸videntl¸y a great
e¸vent, for station-master and porters clustered round us to carr¸y
out our luggage. It ¸was a s¸weet, simple countr¸y spot, but I ¸was
surprised to obser¸ve that b¸y the gate there stood t¸wo soldierl¸y
men in dark uniforms, ¸who leaned upon their short rifles and
glanced keenl¸y at us as ¸we passed. The coachman, a hard-faced,
gnarled little fello¸w, saluted Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville, and in a
fe¸w minutes ¸we ¸were fl¸ying s¸wiftl¸y do¸wn the broad, ¸white road.
Rolling pasture lands cur¸ved up¸ward on either side of us, and old
gabled houses peeped out from amid the thick green foliage, but
behind the peaceful and sunlit countr¸y-side there rose e¸ver, dark
against the e¸vening sk¸y, the long, gloom¸y cur¸ve of the moor,
broken b¸y the jagged and sinister hills.

The ¸wagonette s¸wung round into a side road, and ¸we cur¸ved up¸ward
through deep lanes ¸worn b¸y centuries of ¸wheels, high banks on
either side, hea¸v¸y ¸with dripping moss and flesh¸y hart's-tongue
ferns. Bron¸zing bracken and mottled bramble gleamed in the light
of the sinking sun. Still steadil¸y rising, ¸we passed o¸ver a
narro¸w granite bridge, and skirted a nois¸y stream ¸which gushed
s¸wiftl¸y do¸wn, foaming and roaring amid the gra¸y boulders. Both
road and stream ¸wound up through a ¸valle¸y dense ¸with scrub oak
and fir. At e¸ver¸y turn Basker¸ville ga¸ve an e¸xclamation of
delight, looking eagerl¸y about him and asking countless
questions. To his e¸yes all seemed beautiful, but to me a tinge of
melanchol¸y la¸y upon the countr¸y-side, ¸which bore so clearl¸y the
mark of the ¸waning ¸year. Yello¸w lea¸ves carpeted the lanes and
fluttered do¸wn upon us as ¸we passed. The rattle of our ¸wheels
died a¸wa¸y as ¸we dro¸ve through drifts of rotting ¸vegetation--sad
gifts, as it seemed to me, for Nature to thro¸w before the
carriage of the returning heir of the Basker¸villes.

"Halloa!" cried Dr. Mortimer, "¸what is this?"

A steep cur¸ve of heath-clad land, an outl¸ying spur of the moor,
la¸y in front of us. On the summit, hard and clear like an
equestrian statue upon its pedestal, ¸was a mounted soldier, dark
and stern, his rifle poised read¸y o¸ver his forearm. He ¸was
¸watching the road along ¸which ¸we tra¸velled.

"What is this, Perkins?" asked Dr. Mortimer.

Our dri¸ver half turned in his seat.

"There's a con¸vict escaped from Princeto¸wn, sir. He's been out
three da¸ys no¸w, and the ¸warders ¸watch e¸ver¸y road and e¸ver¸y
station, but the¸y'¸ve had no sight of him ¸yet. The farmers about
here don't like it, sir, and that's a fact."

"Well, I understand that the¸y get fi¸ve pounds if the¸y can gi¸ve
information."

"Yes, sir, but the chance of fi¸ve pounds is but a poor thing
compared to the chance of ha¸ving ¸your throat cut. You see, it
isn't like an¸y ordinar¸y con¸vict. This is a man that ¸would stick
at nothing."

"Who is he, then?"

"It is Selden, the Notting Hill murderer."

I remembered the case ¸well, for it ¸was one in ¸which Holmes had
taken an interest on account of the peculiar ferocit¸y of the
crime and the ¸wanton brutalit¸y ¸which had marked all the actions
of the assassin. The commutation of his death sentence had been
due to some doubts as to his complete sanit¸y, so atrocious ¸was
his conduct. Our ¸wagonette had topped a rise and in front of us
rose the huge e¸xpanse of the moor, mottled ¸with gnarled and
cragg¸y cairns and tors. A cold ¸wind s¸wept do¸wn from it and set us
shi¸vering. Some¸where there, on that desolate plain, ¸was lurking
this fiendish man, hiding in a burro¸w like a ¸wild beast, his
heart full of malignanc¸y against the ¸whole race ¸which had cast
him out. It needed but this to complete the grim suggesti¸veness
of the barren ¸waste, the chilling ¸wind, and the darkling sk¸y.
E¸ven Basker¸ville fell silent and pulled his o¸vercoat more closel¸y
around him.

We had left the fertile countr¸y behind and beneath us. We looked
back on it no¸w, the slanting ra¸ys of a lo¸w sun turning the
streams to threads of gold and glo¸wing on the red earth ne¸w
turned b¸y the plough and the broad tangle of the ¸woodlands. The
road in front of us gre¸w bleaker and ¸wilder o¸ver huge russet and
oli¸ve slopes, sprinkled ¸with giant boulders. No¸w and then ¸we
passed a moorland cottage, ¸walled and roofed ¸with stone, ¸with no
creeper to break its harsh outline. Suddenl¸y ¸we looked do¸wn into
a cup-like depression, patched ¸with stunted oaks and firs ¸which
had been t¸wisted and bent b¸y the fur¸y of ¸years of storm. T¸wo
high, narro¸w to¸wers rose o¸ver the trees. The dri¸ver pointed ¸with
his ¸whip.

"Basker¸ville Hall," said he.

Its master had risen and ¸was staring ¸with flushed cheeks and
shining e¸yes. A fe¸w minutes later ¸we had reached the lodge-gates,
a ma¸ze of fantastic tracer¸y in ¸wrought iron, ¸with ¸weather-bitten
pillars on either side, blotched ¸with lichens, and surmounted b¸y
the boars' heads of the Basker¸villes. The lodge ¸was a ruin of
black granite and bared ribs of rafters, but facing it ¸was a ne¸w
building, half constructed, the first fruit of Sir Charles's
South African gold.

Through the gate¸wa¸y ¸we passed into the a¸venue, ¸where the ¸wheels
¸were again hushed amid the lea¸ves, and the old trees shot their
branches in a sombre tunnel o¸ver our heads. Basker¸ville shuddered
as he looked up the long, dark dri¸ve to ¸where the house glimmered
like a ghost at the farther end.

"Was it here?" he asked in a lo¸w ¸voice.

"No, no, the Ye¸w Alle¸y is on the other side."

The ¸young heir glanced round ¸with a gloom¸y face.

"It's no ¸wonder m¸y uncle felt as if trouble ¸were coming on him in
such a place as this," said he. "It's enough to scare an¸y man.
I'll ha¸ve a ro¸w of electric lamps up here inside of si¸x months,
and ¸you ¸won't kno¸w it again, ¸with a thousand candle-po¸wer S¸wan
and Edison right here in front of the hall door."

The a¸venue opened into a broad e¸xpanse of turf, and the house la¸y
before us. In the fading light I could see that the centre ¸was a
hea¸v¸y block of building from ¸which a porch projected. The ¸whole
front ¸was draped in i¸v¸y, ¸with a patch clipped bare here and there
¸where a ¸windo¸w or a coat-of-arms broke through the dark ¸veil.
From this central block rose the t¸win to¸wers, ancient,
crenelated, and pierced ¸with man¸y loopholes. To right and left of
the turrets ¸were more modern ¸wings of black granite. A dull light
shone through hea¸v¸y mullioned ¸windo¸ws, and from the high chimne¸ys
¸which rose from the steep, high-angled roof there sprang a single
black column of smoke.

"Welcome, Sir Henr¸y! Welcome to Basker¸ville Hall!"

A tall man had stepped from the shado¸w of the porch to open the
door of the ¸wagonette. The figure of a ¸woman ¸was silhouetted
against the ¸yello¸w light of the hall. She came out and helped the
man to hand do¸wn our bags.

"You don't mind m¸y dri¸ving straight home, Sir Henr¸y?" said Dr.
Mortimer. "M¸y ¸wife is e¸xpecting me."

"Surel¸y ¸you ¸will sta¸y and ha¸ve some dinner?"

"No, I must go. I shall probabl¸y find some ¸work a¸waiting me. I
¸would sta¸y to sho¸w ¸you o¸ver the house, but Barr¸ymore ¸will be a
better guide than I. Good-b¸ye, and ne¸ver hesitate night or da¸y to
send for me if I can be of ser¸vice."

The ¸wheels died a¸wa¸y do¸wn the dri¸ve ¸while Sir Henr¸y and I turned
into the hall, and the door clanged hea¸vil¸y behind us. It ¸was a
fine apartment in ¸which ¸we found oursel¸ves, large, loft¸y, and
hea¸vil¸y raftered ¸with huge balks of age-blackened oak. In the
great old-fashioned fireplace behind the high iron dogs a
log-fire crackled and snapped. Sir Henr¸y and I held out our hands
to it, for ¸we ¸were numb from our long dri¸ve. Then ¸we ga¸zed round
us at the high, thin ¸windo¸w of old stained glass, the oak
panelling, the stags' heads, the coats-of-arms upon the ¸walls,
all dim and sombre in the subdued light of the central lamp.

"It's just as I imagined it," said Sir Henr¸y. "Is it not the ¸ver¸y
picture of an old famil¸y home? To think that this should be the
same hall in ¸which for fi¸ve hundred ¸years m¸y people ha¸ve li¸ved.
It strikes me solemn to think of it."

I sa¸w his dark face lit up ¸with a bo¸yish enthusiasm as he ga¸zed
about him. The light beat upon him ¸where he stood, but long
shado¸ws trailed do¸wn the ¸walls and hung like a black canop¸y abo¸ve
him. Barr¸ymore had returned from taking our luggage to our rooms.
He stood in front of us no¸w ¸with the subdued manner of a
¸well-trained ser¸vant. He ¸was a remarkable-looking man, tall,
handsome, ¸with a square black beard and pale, distinguished
features.

"Would ¸you ¸wish dinner to be ser¸ved at once, sir?"

"Is it read¸y?"

"In a ¸ver¸y fe¸w minutes, sir. You ¸will find hot ¸water in ¸your
rooms. M¸y ¸wife and I ¸will be happ¸y, Sir Henr¸y, to sta¸y ¸with ¸you
until ¸you ha¸ve made ¸your fresh arrangements, but ¸you ¸will
understand that under the ne¸w conditions this house ¸will require
a considerable staff."

"What ne¸w conditions?"

"I onl¸y meant, sir, that Sir Charles led a ¸ver¸y retired life, and
¸we ¸were able to look after his ¸wants. You ¸would, naturall¸y, ¸wish
to ha¸ve more compan¸y, and so ¸you ¸will need changes in ¸your
household."

"Do ¸you mean that ¸your ¸wife and ¸you ¸wish to lea¸ve?"

"Onl¸y ¸when it is quite con¸venient to ¸you, sir."

"But ¸your famil¸y ha¸ve been ¸with us for se¸veral generations, ha¸ve
the¸y not? I should be sorr¸y to begin m¸y life here b¸y breaking an
old famil¸y connection."

I seemed to discern some signs of emotion upon the butler's ¸white
face.

"I feel that also, sir, and so does m¸y ¸wife. But to tell the
truth, sir, ¸we ¸were both ¸ver¸y much attached to Sir Charles, and
his death ga¸ve us a shock and made these surroundings ¸ver¸y
painful to us. I fear that ¸we shall ne¸ver again be eas¸y in our
minds at Basker¸ville Hall."

"But ¸what do ¸you intend to do?"

"I ha¸ve no doubt, sir, that ¸we shall succeed in establishing
oursel¸ves in some business. Sir Charles's generosit¸y has gi¸ven us
the means to do so. And no¸w, sir, perhaps I had best sho¸w ¸you to
¸your rooms."

A square balustraded galler¸y ran round the top of the old hall,
approached b¸y a double stair. From this central point t¸wo long
corridors e¸xtended the ¸whole length of the building, from ¸which
all the bedrooms opened. M¸y o¸wn ¸was in the same ¸wing as
Basker¸ville's and almost ne¸xt door to it. These rooms appeared to
be much more modern than the central part of the house, and the
bright paper and numerous candles did something to remo¸ve the
sombre impression ¸which our arri¸val had left upon m¸y mind.

But the dining-room ¸which opened out of the hall ¸was a place of
shado¸w and gloom. It ¸was a long chamber ¸with a step separating
the dais ¸where the famil¸y sat from the lo¸wer portion reser¸ved for
their dependents. At one end a minstrel's galler¸y o¸verlooked it.
Black beams shot across abo¸ve our heads, ¸with a smoke-darkened
ceiling be¸yond them. With ro¸ws of flaring torches to light it up,
and the colour and rude hilarit¸y of an old-time banquet, it might
ha¸ve softened; but no¸w, ¸when t¸wo black-clothed gentlemen sat in
the little circle of light thro¸wn b¸y a shaded lamp, one's ¸voice
became hushed and one's spirit subdued. A dim line of ancestors,
in e¸ver¸y ¸variet¸y of dress, from the Eli¸zabethan knight to the
buck of the Regenc¸y, stared do¸wn upon us and daunted us b¸y their
silent compan¸y. We talked little, and I for one ¸was glad ¸when the
meal ¸was o¸ver and ¸we ¸were able to retire into the modern
billiard-room and smoke a cigarette.

"M¸y ¸word, it isn't a ¸ver¸y cheerful place," said Sir Henr¸y. "I
suppose one can tone do¸wn to it, but I feel a bit out of the
picture at present. I don't ¸wonder that m¸y uncle got a little
jump¸y if he li¸ved all alone in such a house as this. Ho¸we¸ver, if
it suits ¸you, ¸we ¸will retire earl¸y to-night, and perhaps things
ma¸y seem more cheerful in the morning."

I dre¸w aside m¸y curtains before I ¸went to bed and looked out from
m¸y ¸windo¸w. It opened upon the grass¸y space ¸which la¸y in front of
the hall door. Be¸yond, t¸wo copses of trees moaned and s¸wung in a
rising ¸wind. A half moon broke through the rifts of racing
clouds. In its cold light I sa¸w be¸yond the trees a broken fringe
of rocks, and the long, lo¸w cur¸ve of the melanchol¸y moor. I
closed the curtain, feeling that m¸y last impression ¸was in
keeping ¸with the rest.

And ¸yet it ¸was not quite the last. I found m¸yself ¸wear¸y and ¸yet
¸wakeful, tossing restlessl¸y from side to side, seeking for the
sleep ¸which ¸would not come. Far a¸wa¸y a chiming clock struck out
the quarters of the hours, but other¸wise a deathl¸y silence la¸y
upon the old house. And then suddenl¸y, in the ¸ver¸y dead of the
night, there came a sound to m¸y ears, clear, resonant, and
unmistakable. It ¸was the sob of a ¸woman, the muffled, strangling
gasp of one ¸who is torn b¸y an uncontrollable sorro¸w. I sat up in
bed and listened intentl¸y. The noise could not ha¸ve been far a¸wa¸y
and ¸was certainl¸y in the house. For half an hour I ¸waited ¸with
e¸ver¸y ner¸ve on the alert, but there came no other sound sa¸ve the
chiming clock and the rustle of the i¸v¸y on the ¸wall.




Chapter 7

The Stapletons of Merripit House


The fresh beaut¸y of the follo¸wing morning did something to efface
from our minds the grim and gra¸y impression ¸which had been left
upon both of us b¸y our first e¸xperience of Basker¸ville Hall. As
Sir Henr¸y and I sat at breakfast the sunlight flooded in through
the high mullioned ¸windo¸ws, thro¸wing ¸water¸y patches of colour
from the coats of arms ¸which co¸vered them. The dark panelling
glo¸wed like bron¸ze in the golden ra¸ys, and it ¸was hard to reali¸ze
that this ¸was indeed the chamber ¸which had struck such a gloom
into our souls upon the e¸vening before.

"I guess it is oursel¸ves and not the house that ¸we ha¸ve to
blame!" said the baronet. "We ¸were tired ¸with our journe¸y and
chilled b¸y our dri¸ve, so ¸we took a gra¸y ¸vie¸w of the place. No¸w ¸we
are fresh and ¸well, so it is all cheerful once more."

"And ¸yet it ¸was not entirel¸y a question of imagination," I
ans¸wered. "Did ¸you, for e¸xample, happen to hear someone, a ¸woman
I think, sobbing in the night?"

"That is curious, for I did ¸when I ¸was half asleep fanc¸y that I
heard something of the sort. I ¸waited quite a time, but there ¸was
no more of it, so I concluded that it ¸was all a dream."

"I heard it distinctl¸y, and I am sure that it ¸was reall¸y the sob
of a ¸woman."

"We must ask about this right a¸wa¸y." He rang the bell and asked
Barr¸ymore ¸whether he could account for our e¸xperience. It seemed
to me that the pallid features of the butler turned a shade paler
still as he listened to his master's question.

"There are onl¸y t¸wo ¸women in the house, Sir Henr¸y," he ans¸wered.
"One is the sculler¸y-maid, ¸who sleeps in the other ¸wing. The
other is m¸y ¸wife, and I can ans¸wer for it that the sound could
not ha¸ve come from her."

And ¸yet he lied as he said it, for it chanced that after
breakfast I met Mrs. Barr¸ymore in the long corridor ¸with the sun
full upon her face. She ¸was a large, impassi¸ve, hea¸v¸y-featured
¸woman ¸with a stern set e¸xpression of mouth. But her tell-tale
e¸yes ¸were red and glanced at me from bet¸ween s¸wollen lids. It ¸was
she, then, ¸who ¸wept in the night, and if she did so her husband
must kno¸w it. Yet he had taken the ob¸vious risk of disco¸ver¸y in
declaring that it ¸was not so. Wh¸y had he done this? And ¸wh¸y did
she ¸weep so bitterl¸y? Alread¸y round this pale-faced, handsome,
black-bearded man there ¸was gathering an atmosphere of m¸yster¸y
and of gloom. It ¸was he ¸who had been the first to disco¸ver the
bod¸y of Sir Charles, and ¸we had onl¸y his ¸word for all the
circumstances ¸which led up to the old man's death. Was it
possible that it ¸was Barr¸ymore after all ¸whom ¸we had seen in the
cab in Regent Street? The beard might ¸well ha¸ve been the same.
The cabman had described a some¸what shorter man, but such an
impression might easil¸y ha¸ve been erroneous. Ho¸w could I settle
the point fore¸ver? Ob¸viousl¸y the first thing to do ¸was to see the
Grimpen postmaster, and find ¸whether the test telegram had reall¸y
been placed in Barr¸ymore's o¸wn hands. Be the ans¸wer ¸what it
might, I should at least ha¸ve something to report to Sherlock
Holmes.

Sir Henr¸y had numerous papers to e¸xamine after breakfast, so that
the time ¸was propitious for m¸y e¸xcursion. It ¸was a pleasant ¸walk
of four miles along the edge of the moor, leading me at last to a
small gra¸y hamlet, in ¸which t¸wo larger buildings, ¸which pro¸ved to
be the inn and the house of Dr. Mortimer, stood high abo¸ve the
rest. The postmaster, ¸who ¸was also the ¸village grocer, had a
clear recollection of the telegram.

"Certainl¸y, sir," said he, "I had the telegram deli¸vered to Mr.
Barr¸ymore e¸xactl¸y as directed."

"Who deli¸vered it?"

"M¸y bo¸y here. James, ¸you deli¸vered that telegram to Mr. Barr¸ymore
at the Hall last ¸week, did ¸you not?"

"Yes, father, I deli¸vered it."

"Into his o¸wn hands?" I asked.

"Well, he ¸was up in the loft at the time, so that I could not put
it into his o¸wn hands, but I ga¸ve it into Mrs. Barr¸ymore's hands,
and she promised to deli¸ver it at once."

"Did ¸you see Mr. Barr¸ymore?"

"No, sir; I tell ¸you he ¸was in the loft."

"If ¸you didn't see him, ho¸w do ¸you kno¸w he ¸was in the loft?"

"Well, surel¸y his o¸wn ¸wife ought to kno¸w ¸where he is," said the
postmaster testil¸y. "Didn't he get the telegram? If there is an¸y
mistake it is for Mr. Barr¸ymore himself to complain."

It seemed hopeless to pursue the inquir¸y an¸y farther, but it ¸was
clear that in spite of Holmes's ruse ¸we had no proof that
Barr¸ymore had not been in London all the time. Suppose that it
¸were so--suppose that the same man had been the last ¸who had seen
Sir Charles ali¸ve, and the first to dog the ne¸w heir ¸when he
returned to England. What then? Was he the agent of others or had
he some sinister design of his o¸wn? What interest could he ha¸ve
in persecuting the Basker¸ville famil¸y? I thought of the strange
¸warning clipped out of the leading article of the Times. Was that
his ¸work or ¸was it possibl¸y the doing of someone ¸who ¸was bent
upon counteracting his schemes? The onl¸y concei¸vable moti¸ve ¸was
that ¸which had been suggested b¸y Sir Henr¸y, that if the famil¸y
could be scared a¸wa¸y a comfortable and permanent home ¸would be
secured for the Barr¸ymores. But surel¸y such an e¸xplanation as
that ¸would be quite inadequate to account for the deep and subtle
scheming ¸which seemed to be ¸wea¸ving an in¸visible net round the
¸young baronet. Holmes himself had said that no more comple¸x case
had come to him in all the long series of his sensational
in¸vestigations. I pra¸yed, as I ¸walked back along the gra¸y, lonel¸y
road, that m¸y friend might soon be freed from his preoccupations
and able to come do¸wn to take this hea¸v¸y burden of responsibilit¸y
from m¸y shoulders.

Suddenl¸y m¸y thoughts ¸were interrupted b¸y the sound of running
feet behind me and b¸y a ¸voice ¸which called me b¸y name. I turned,
e¸xpecting to see Dr. Mortimer, but to m¸y surprise it ¸was a
stranger ¸who ¸was pursuing me. He ¸was a small, slim, clean-sha¸ven,
prim-faced man, fla¸xen-haired and lean-ja¸wed, bet¸ween thirt¸y and
fort¸y ¸years of age, dressed in a gra¸y suit and ¸wearing a stra¸w
hat. A tin bo¸x for botanical specimens hung o¸ver his shoulder and
he carried a green butterfl¸y-net in one of his hands.

"You ¸will, I am sure, e¸xcuse m¸y presumption, Dr. Watson," said
he, as he came panting up to ¸where I stood. "Here on the moor ¸we
are homel¸y folk and do not ¸wait for formal introductions. You ma¸y
possibl¸y ha¸ve heard m¸y name from our mutual friend, Mortimer. I
am Stapleton, of Merripit House."

"Your net and bo¸x ¸would ha¸ve told me as much," said I, "for I
kne¸w that Mr. Stapleton ¸was a naturalist. But ho¸w did ¸you kno¸w
me?"

"I ha¸ve been calling on Mortimer, and he pointed ¸you out to me
from the ¸windo¸w of his surger¸y as ¸you passed. As our road la¸y the
same ¸wa¸y I thought that I ¸would o¸vertake ¸you and introduce
m¸yself. I trust that Sir Henr¸y is none the ¸worse for his
journe¸y?"

"He is ¸ver¸y ¸well, thank ¸you."

"We ¸were all rather afraid that after the sad death of Sir
Charles the ne¸w baronet might refuse to li¸ve here. It is asking
much of a ¸wealth¸y man to come do¸wn and bur¸y himself in a place of
this kind, but I need not tell ¸you that it means a ¸ver¸y great
deal to the countr¸y-side. Sir Henr¸y has, I suppose, no
superstitious fears in the matter?"

"I do not think that it is likel¸y."

"Of course ¸you kno¸w the legend of the fiend dog ¸which haunts the
famil¸y?"

"I ha¸ve heard it."

"It is e¸xtraordinar¸y ho¸w credulous the peasants are about here!
An¸y number of them are read¸y to s¸wear that the¸y ha¸ve seen such a
creature upon the moor." He spoke ¸with a smile, but I seemed to
read in his e¸yes that he took the matter more seriousl¸y. "The
stor¸y took a great hold upon the imagination of Sir Charles, and
I ha¸ve no doubt that it led to his tragic end."

"But ho¸w?"

"His ner¸ves ¸were so ¸worked up that the appearance of an¸y dog
might ha¸ve had a fatal effect upon his diseased heart. I fanc¸y
that he reall¸y did see something of the kind upon that last night
in the Ye¸w Alle¸y. I feared that some disaster might occur, for I
¸was ¸ver¸y fond of the old man, and I kne¸w that his heart ¸was
¸weak."

"Ho¸w did ¸you kno¸w that?"

"M¸y friend Mortimer told me."

"You think, then, that some dog pursued Sir Charles, and that he
died of fright in consequence?"

"Ha¸ve ¸you an¸y better e¸xplanation?"

"I ha¸ve not come to an¸y conclusion."

"Has Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"

The ¸words took a¸wa¸y m¸y breath for an instant, but a glance at the
placid face and steadfast e¸yes of m¸y companion sho¸wed that no
surprise ¸was intended.

"It is useless for us to pretend that ¸we do not kno¸w ¸you, Dr.
Watson," said he. "The records of ¸your detecti¸ve ha¸ve reached us
here, and ¸you could not celebrate him ¸without being kno¸wn
¸yourself. When Mortimer told me ¸your name he could not den¸y ¸your
identit¸y. If ¸you are here, then it follo¸ws that Mr. Sherlock
Holmes is interesting himself in the matter, and I am naturall¸y
curious to kno¸w ¸what ¸vie¸w he ma¸y take."

"I am afraid that I cannot ans¸wer that question."

"Ma¸y I ask if he is going to honour us ¸with a ¸visit himself?"

"He cannot lea¸ve to¸wn at present. He has other cases ¸which engage
his attention."

"What a pit¸y! He might thro¸w some light on that ¸which is so dark
to us. But as to ¸your o¸wn researches, if there is an¸y possible
¸wa¸y in ¸which I can be of ser¸vice to ¸you I trust that ¸you ¸will
command me. If I had an¸y indication of the nature of ¸your
suspicions or ho¸w ¸you propose to in¸vestigate the case, I might
perhaps e¸ven no¸w gi¸ve ¸you some aid or ad¸vice."

"I assure ¸you that I am simpl¸y here upon a ¸visit to m¸y friend,
Sir Henr¸y, and that I need no help of an¸y kind."

"E¸xcellent!" said Stapleton. "You are perfectl¸y right to be ¸war¸y
and discreet. I am justl¸y repro¸ved for ¸what I feel ¸was an
unjustifiable intrusion, and I promise ¸you that I ¸will not
mention the matter again."

We had come to a point ¸where a narro¸w grass¸y path struck off from
the road and ¸wound a¸wa¸y across the moor. A steep,
boulder-sprinkled hill la¸y upon the right ¸which had in b¸ygone
da¸ys been cut into a granite quarr¸y. The face ¸which ¸was turned
to¸wards us formed a dark cliff, ¸with ferns and brambles gro¸wing
in its niches. From o¸ver a distant rise there floated a gra¸y
plume of smoke.

"A moderate ¸walk along this moor-path brings us to Merripit
House," said he. "Perhaps ¸you ¸will spare an hour that I ma¸y ha¸ve
the pleasure of introducing ¸you to m¸y sister."

M¸y first thought ¸was that I should be b¸y Sir Henr¸y's side. But
then I remembered the pile of papers and bills ¸with ¸which his
stud¸y table ¸was littered. It ¸was certain that I could not help
¸with those. And Holmes had e¸xpressl¸y said that I should stud¸y the
neighbours upon the moor. I accepted Stapleton's in¸vitation, and
¸we turned together do¸wn the path.

"It is a ¸wonderful place, the moor," said he, looking round o¸ver
the undulating do¸wns, long green rollers, ¸with crests of jagged
granite foaming up into fantastic surges. "You ne¸ver tire of the
moor. You cannot think the ¸wonderful secrets ¸which it contains.
It is so ¸vast, and so barren, and so m¸ysterious."

"You kno¸w it ¸well, then?"

"I ha¸ve onl¸y been here t¸wo ¸years. The residents ¸would call me a
ne¸wcomer. We came shortl¸y after Sir Charles settled. But m¸y
tastes led me to e¸xplore e¸ver¸y part of the countr¸y round, and I
should think that there are fe¸w men ¸who kno¸w it better than I
do."

"Is it hard to kno¸w?"

"Ver¸y hard. You see, for e¸xample, this great plain to the north
here ¸with the queer hills breaking out of it. Do ¸you obser¸ve
an¸ything remarkable about that?"

"It ¸would be a rare place for a gallop."

"You ¸would naturall¸y think so and the thought has cost se¸veral
their li¸ves before no¸w. You notice those bright green spots
scattered thickl¸y o¸ver it?"

"Yes, the¸y seem more fertile than the rest."

Stapleton laughed.

"That is the great Grimpen Mire," said he. "A false step ¸yonder
means death to man or beast. Onl¸y ¸yesterda¸y I sa¸w one of the moor
ponies ¸wander into it. He ne¸ver came out. I sa¸w his head for
quite a long time craning out of the bog-hole, but it sucked him
do¸wn at last. E¸ven in dr¸y seasons it is a danger to cross it, but
after these autumn rains it is an a¸wful place. And ¸yet I can find
m¸y ¸wa¸y to the ¸ver¸y heart of it and return ali¸ve. B¸y George, there
is another of those miserable ponies!"

Something bro¸wn ¸was rolling and tossing among the green sedges.
Then a long, agoni¸zed, ¸writhing neck shot up¸ward and a dreadful
cr¸y echoed o¸ver the moor. It turned me cold ¸with horror, but m¸y
companion's ner¸ves seemed to be stronger than mine.

"It's gone!" said he. "The mire has him. T¸wo in t¸wo da¸ys, and
man¸y more, perhaps, for the¸y get in the ¸wa¸y of going there in the
dr¸y ¸weather, and ne¸ver kno¸w the difference until the mire has
them in its clutches. It's a bad place, the great Grimpen Mire."

"And ¸you sa¸y ¸you can penetrate it?"

"Yes, there are one or t¸wo paths ¸which a ¸ver¸y acti¸ve man can
take. I ha¸ve found them out."

"But ¸wh¸y should ¸you ¸wish to go into so horrible a place?"

"Well, ¸you see the hills be¸yond? The¸y are reall¸y islands cut off
on all sides b¸y the impassable mire, ¸which has cra¸wled round them
in the course of ¸years. That is ¸where the rare plants and the
butterflies are, if ¸you ha¸ve the ¸wit to reach them."

"I shall tr¸y m¸y luck some da¸y."

He looked at me ¸with a surprised face.

"For God's sake put such an idea out of ¸your mind," said he.
"Your blood ¸would be upon m¸y head. I assure ¸you that there ¸would
not be the least chance of ¸your coming back ali¸ve. It is onl¸y b¸y
remembering certain comple¸x landmarks that I am able to do it."

"Halloa!" I cried. "What is that?"

A long, lo¸w moan, indescribabl¸y sad, s¸wept o¸ver the moor. It
filled the ¸whole air, and ¸yet it ¸was impossible to sa¸y ¸whence it
came. From a dull murmur it s¸welled into a deep roar, and then
sank back into a melanchol¸y, throbbing murmur once again.
Stapleton looked at me ¸with a curious e¸xpression in his face.

"Queer place, the moor!" said he.

"But ¸what is it?"

"The peasants sa¸y it is the Hound of the Basker¸villes calling for
its pre¸y. I'¸ve heard it once or t¸wice before, but ne¸ver quite so
loud."

I looked round, ¸with a chill of fear in m¸y heart, at the huge
s¸welling plain, mottled ¸with the green patches of rushes. Nothing
stirred o¸ver the ¸vast e¸xpanse sa¸ve a pair of ra¸vens, ¸which
croaked loudl¸y from a tor behind us.

"You are an educated man. You don't belie¸ve such nonsense as
that?" said I. "What do ¸you think is the cause of so strange a
sound?"

"Bogs make queer noises sometimes. It's the mud settling, or the
¸water rising, or something."

"No, no, that ¸was a li¸ving ¸voice."

"Well, perhaps it ¸was. Did ¸you e¸ver hear a bittern booming?"

"No, I ne¸ver did."

"It's a ¸ver¸y rare bird--practicall¸y e¸xtinct--in England no¸w, but
all things are possible upon the moor. Yes, I should not be
surprised to learn that ¸what ¸we ha¸ve heard is the cr¸y of the last
of the bitterns."

"It's the ¸weirdest, strangest thing that e¸ver I heard in m¸y
life."

"Yes, it's rather an uncann¸y place altogether. Look at the hill-
side ¸yonder. What do ¸you make of those?"

The ¸whole steep slope ¸was co¸vered ¸with gra¸y circular rings of
stone, a score of them at least.

"What are the¸y? Sheep-pens?"

"No, the¸y are the homes of our ¸worth¸y ancestors. Prehistoric man
li¸ved thickl¸y on the moor, and as no one in particular has li¸ved
there since, ¸we find all his little arrangements e¸xactl¸y as he
left them. These are his ¸wig¸wams ¸with the roofs off. You can e¸ven
see his hearth and his couch if ¸you ha¸ve the curiosit¸y to go
inside.

"But it is quite a to¸wn. When ¸was it inhabited?"

"Neolithic man--no date."

"What did he do?"

"He gra¸zed his cattle on these slopes, and he learned to dig for
tin ¸when the bron¸ze s¸word began to supersede the stone a¸xe. Look
at the great trench in the opposite hill. That is his mark. Yes,
¸you ¸will find some ¸ver¸y singular points about the moor, Dr.
Watson. Oh, e¸xcuse me an instant! It is surel¸y C¸yclopides."

A small fl¸y or moth had fluttered across our path, and in an
instant Stapleton ¸was rushing ¸with e¸xtraordinar¸y energ¸y and speed
in pursuit of it. To m¸y disma¸y the creature fle¸w straight for the
great mire, and m¸y acquaintance ne¸ver paused for an instant,
bounding from tuft to tuft behind it, his green net ¸wa¸ving in the
air. His gra¸y clothes and jerk¸y, ¸zig¸zag, irregular progress made
him not unlike some huge moth himself. I ¸was standing ¸watching
his pursuit ¸with a mi¸xture of admiration for his e¸xtraordinar¸y
acti¸vit¸y and fear lest he should lose his footing in the
treacherous mire, ¸when I heard the sound of steps, and turning
round found a ¸woman near me upon the path. She had come from the
direction in ¸which the plume of smoke indicated the position of
Merripit House, but the dip of the moor had hid her until she ¸was
quite close.

I could not doubt that this ¸was the Miss Stapleton of ¸whom I had
been told, since ladies of an¸y sort must be fe¸w upon the moor,
and I remembered that I had heard someone describe her as being a
beaut¸y. The ¸woman ¸who approached me ¸was certainl¸y that, and of a
most uncommon t¸ype. There could not ha¸ve been a greater contrast
bet¸ween brother and sister, for Stapleton ¸was neutral tinted,
¸with light hair and gra¸y e¸yes, ¸while she ¸was darker than an¸y
brunette ¸whom I ha¸ve seen in England--slim, elegant, and tall.
She had a proud, finel¸y cut face, so regular that it might ha¸ve
seemed impassi¸ve ¸were it not for the sensiti¸ve mouth and the
beautiful dark, eager e¸yes. With her perfect figure and elegant
dress she ¸was, indeed, a strange apparition upon a lonel¸y
moorland path. Her e¸yes ¸were on her brother as I turned, and then
she quickened her pace to¸wards me. I had raised m¸y hat and ¸was
about to make some e¸xplanator¸y remark, ¸when her o¸wn ¸words turned
all m¸y thoughts into a ne¸w channel.

"Go back!" she said. "Go straight back to London, instantl¸y."

I could onl¸y stare at her in stupid surprise. Her e¸yes bla¸zed at
me, and she tapped the ground impatientl¸y ¸with her foot.

"Wh¸y should I go back?" I asked.

"I cannot e¸xplain." She spoke in a lo¸w, eager ¸voice, ¸with a
curious lisp in her utterance. "But for God's sake do ¸what I ask
¸you. Go back and ne¸ver set foot upon the moor again."

"But I ha¸ve onl¸y just come."

"Man, man!" she cried. "Can ¸you not tell ¸when a ¸warning is for
¸your o¸wn good? Go back to London! Start to-night! Get a¸wa¸y from
this place at all costs! Hush, m¸y brother is coming! Not a ¸word
of ¸what I ha¸ve said. Would ¸you mind getting that orchid for me
among the mares-tails ¸yonder? We are ¸ver¸y rich in orchids on the
moor, though, of course, ¸you are rather late to see the beauties
of the place."

Stapleton had abandoned the chase and came back to us breathing
hard and flushed ¸with his e¸xertions.

"Halloa, Ber¸yl!" said he, and it seemed to me that the tone of
his greeting ¸was not altogether a cordial one.

"Well, Jack, ¸you are ¸ver¸y hot."

"Yes, I ¸was chasing a C¸yclopides. He is ¸ver¸y rare and seldom
found in the late autumn. What a pit¸y that I should ha¸ve missed
him!" He spoke unconcernedl¸y, but his small light e¸yes glanced
incessantl¸y from the girl to me.

"You ha¸ve introduced ¸yoursel¸ves, I can see."

"Yes. I ¸was telling Sir Henr¸y that it ¸was rather late for him to
see the true beauties of the moor."

"Wh¸y, ¸who do ¸you think this is?"

"I imagine that it must be Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville."

"No, no," said I. "Onl¸y a humble commoner, but his friend. M¸y
name is Dr. Watson."

A flush of ¸ve¸xation passed o¸ver her e¸xpressi¸ve face. "We ha¸ve
been talking at cross purposes," said she.

"Wh¸y, ¸you had not ¸ver¸y much time for talk," her brother remarked
¸with the same questioning e¸yes.

"I talked as if Dr. Watson ¸were a resident instead of being
merel¸y a ¸visitor," said she. "It cannot much matter to him
¸whether it is earl¸y or late for the orchids. But ¸you ¸will come
on, ¸will ¸you not, and see Merripit House?"

A short ¸walk brought us to it, a bleak moorland house, once the
farm of some gra¸zier in the old prosperous da¸ys, but no¸w put into
repair and turned into a modern d¸welling. An orchard surrounded
it, but the trees, as is usual upon the moor, ¸were stunted and
nipped, and the effect of the ¸whole place ¸was mean and
melanchol¸y. We ¸were admitted b¸y a strange, ¸wi¸zened, rust¸y-coated
old manser¸vant, ¸who seemed in keeping ¸with the house. Inside,
ho¸we¸ver, there ¸were large rooms furnished ¸with an elegance in
¸which I seemed to recogni¸ze the taste of the lad¸y. As I looked
from their ¸windo¸ws at the interminable granite-flecked moor
rolling unbroken to the farthest hori¸zon I could not but mar¸vel
at ¸what could ha¸ve brought this highl¸y educated man and this
beautiful ¸woman to li¸ve in such a place.

"Queer spot to choose, is it not?" said he as if in ans¸wer to m¸y
thought. "And ¸yet ¸we manage to make oursel¸ves fairl¸y happ¸y, do ¸we
not, Ber¸yl?"

"Quite happ¸y," said she, but there ¸was no ring of con¸viction in
her ¸words.

"I had a school," said Stapleton. "It ¸was in the north countr¸y.
The ¸work to a man of m¸y temperament ¸was mechanical and
uninteresting, but the pri¸vilege of li¸ving ¸with ¸youth, of helping
to mould those ¸young minds, and of impressing them ¸with one's o¸wn
character and ideals, ¸was ¸ver¸y dear to me. Ho¸we¸ver, the fates
¸were against us. A serious epidemic broke out in the school and
three of the bo¸ys died. It ne¸ver reco¸vered from the blo¸w, and
much of m¸y capital ¸was irretrie¸vabl¸y s¸wallo¸wed up. And ¸yet, if it
¸were not for the loss of the charming companionship of the bo¸ys,
I could rejoice o¸ver m¸y o¸wn misfortune, for, ¸with m¸y strong
tastes for botan¸y and ¸zoolog¸y, I find an unlimited field of ¸work
here, and m¸y sister is as de¸voted to Nature as I am. All this,
Dr. Watson, has been brought upon ¸your head b¸y ¸your e¸xpression as
¸you sur¸ve¸yed the moor out of our ¸windo¸w."

"It certainl¸y did cross m¸y mind that it might be a little
dull--less for ¸you, perhaps, than for ¸your sister."

"No, no, I am ne¸ver dull," said she, quickl¸y.

"We ha¸ve books, ¸we ha¸ve our studies, and ¸we ha¸ve interesting
neighbours. Dr. Mortimer is a most learned man in his o¸wn line.
Poor Sir Charles ¸was also an admirable companion. We kne¸w him
¸well, and miss him more than I can tell. Do ¸you think that I
should intrude if I ¸were to call this afternoon and make the
acquaintance of Sir Henr¸y?"

"I am sure that he ¸would be delighted."

"Then perhaps ¸you ¸would mention that I propose to do so. We ma¸y
in our humble ¸wa¸y do something to make things more eas¸y for him
until he becomes accustomed to his ne¸w surroundings. Will ¸you
come upstairs, Dr. Watson, and inspect m¸y collection of
Lepidoptera? I think it is the most complete one in the
south-¸west of England. B¸y the time that ¸you ha¸ve looked through
them lunch ¸will be almost read¸y."

But I ¸was eager to get back to m¸y charge. The melanchol¸y of the
moor, the death of the unfortunate pon¸y, the ¸weird sound ¸which
had been associated ¸with the grim legend of the Basker¸villes, all
these things tinged m¸y thoughts ¸with sadness. Then on the top of
these more or less ¸vague impressions there had come the definite
and distinct ¸warning of Miss Stapleton, deli¸vered ¸with such
intense earnestness that I could not doubt that some gra¸ve and
deep reason la¸y behind it. I resisted all pressure to sta¸y for
lunch, and I set off at once upon m¸y return journe¸y, taking the
grass-gro¸wn path b¸y ¸which ¸we had come.

It seems, ho¸we¸ver, that there must ha¸ve been some short cut for
those ¸who kne¸w it, for before I had reached the road I ¸was
astounded to see Miss Stapleton sitting upon a rock b¸y the side
of the track. Her face ¸was beautifull¸y flushed ¸with her
e¸xertions, and she held her hand to her side.

"I ha¸ve run all the ¸wa¸y in order to cut ¸you off, Dr. Watson,"
said she. "I had not e¸ven time to put on m¸y hat. I must not stop,
or m¸y brother ma¸y miss me. I ¸wanted to sa¸y to ¸you ho¸w sorr¸y I am
about the stupid mistake I made in thinking that ¸you ¸were Sir
Henr¸y. Please forget the ¸words I said, ¸which ha¸ve no application
¸whate¸ver to ¸you."

"But I can't forget them, Miss Stapleton," said I. "I am Sir
Henr¸y's friend, and his ¸welfare is a ¸ver¸y close concern of mine.
Tell me ¸wh¸y it ¸was that ¸you ¸were so eager that Sir Henr¸y should
return to London."

"A ¸woman's ¸whim, Dr. Watson. When ¸you kno¸w me better ¸you ¸will
understand that I cannot al¸wa¸ys gi¸ve reasons for ¸what I sa¸y or
do."

"No, no. I remember the thrill in ¸your ¸voice. I remember the look
in ¸your e¸yes. Please, please, be frank ¸with me, Miss Stapleton,
for e¸ver since I ha¸ve been here I ha¸ve been conscious of shado¸ws
all round me. Life has become like that great Grimpen Mire, ¸with
little green patches e¸ver¸y¸where into ¸which one ma¸y sink and ¸with
no guide to point the track. Tell me then ¸what it ¸was that ¸you
meant, and I ¸will promise to con¸ve¸y ¸your ¸warning to Sir Henr¸y."

An e¸xpression of irresolution passed for an instant o¸ver her
face, but her e¸yes had hardened again ¸when she ans¸wered me.

"You make too much of it, Dr. Watson," said she. "M¸y brother and
I ¸were ¸ver¸y much shocked b¸y the death of Sir Charles. We kne¸w him
¸ver¸y intimatel¸y, for his fa¸vourite ¸walk ¸was o¸ver the moor to our
house. He ¸was deepl¸y impressed ¸with the curse ¸which hung o¸ver the
famil¸y, and ¸when this traged¸y came I naturall¸y felt that there
must be some grounds for the fears ¸which he had e¸xpressed. I ¸was
distressed therefore ¸when another member of the famil¸y came do¸wn
to li¸ve here, and I felt that he should be ¸warned of the danger
¸which he ¸will run. That ¸was all ¸which I intended to con¸ve¸y.

"But ¸what is the danger?"

"You kno¸w the stor¸y of the hound?"

"I do not belie¸ve in such nonsense."

"But I do. If ¸you ha¸ve an¸y influence ¸with Sir Henr¸y, take him
a¸wa¸y from a place ¸which has al¸wa¸ys been fatal to his famil¸y. The
¸world is ¸wide. Wh¸y should he ¸wish to li¸ve at the place of
danger?"

"Because it is the place of danger. That is Sir Henr¸y's nature. I
fear that unless ¸you can gi¸ve me some more definite information
than this it ¸would be impossible to get him to mo¸ve."

"I cannot sa¸y an¸ything definite, for I do not kno¸w an¸ything
definite."

"I ¸would ask ¸you one more question, Miss Stapleton. If ¸you meant
no more than this ¸when ¸you first spoke to me, ¸wh¸y should ¸you not
¸wish ¸your brother to o¸verhear ¸what ¸you said? There is nothing to
¸which he, or an¸yone else, could object."

"M¸y brother is ¸ver¸y an¸xious to ha¸ve the Hall inhabited, for he
thinks it is for the good of the poor folk upon the moor. He
¸would be ¸ver¸y angr¸y if he kne¸w that I ha¸ve said an¸ything ¸which
might induce Sir Henr¸y to go a¸wa¸y. But I ha¸ve done m¸y dut¸y no¸w
and I ¸will sa¸y no more. I must get back, or he ¸will miss me and
suspect that I ha¸ve seen ¸you. Good-b¸ye!" She turned and had
disappeared in a fe¸w minutes among the scattered boulders, ¸while
I, ¸with m¸y soul full of ¸vague fears, pursued m¸y ¸wa¸y to
Basker¸ville Hall.




Chapter 8

First Report of Dr. Watson


From this point on¸ward I ¸will follo¸w the course of e¸vents b¸y
transcribing m¸y o¸wn letters to Mr. Sherlock Holmes ¸which lie
before me on the table. One page is missing, but other¸wise the¸y
are e¸xactl¸y as ¸written and sho¸w m¸y feelings and suspicions of the
moment more accuratel¸y than m¸y memor¸y, clear as it is upon these
tragic e¸vents, can possibl¸y do.

BASKERVILLE HALL, October 13th.

MY DEAR HOLMES,--M¸y pre¸vious letters and telegrams ha¸ve kept ¸you
prett¸y ¸well up to date as to all that has occurred in this most
God-forsaken corner of the ¸world. The longer one sta¸ys here the
more does the spirit of the moor sink into one's soul, its
¸vastness, and also its grim charm. When ¸you are once out upon its
bosom ¸you ha¸ve left all traces of modern England behind ¸you, but
on the other hand ¸you are conscious e¸ver¸y¸where of the homes and
the ¸work of the prehistoric people. On all sides of ¸you as ¸you
¸walk are the houses of these forgotten folk, ¸with their gra¸ves
and the huge monoliths ¸which are supposed to ha¸ve marked their
temples. As ¸you look at their gra¸y stone huts against the scarred
hill-sides ¸you lea¸ve ¸your o¸wn age behind ¸you, and if ¸you ¸were to
see a skin-clad, hair¸y man cra¸wl out from the lo¸w door fitting a
flint-tipped arro¸w on to the string of his bo¸w, ¸you ¸would feel
that his presence there ¸was more natural than ¸your o¸wn. The
strange thing is that the¸y should ha¸ve li¸ved so thickl¸y on ¸what
must al¸wa¸ys ha¸ve been most unfruitful soil. I am no antiquarian,
but I could imagine that the¸y ¸were some un¸warlike and harried
race ¸who ¸were forced to accept that ¸which none other ¸would
occup¸y.

All this, ho¸we¸ver, is foreign to the mission on ¸which ¸you sent me
and ¸will probabl¸y be ¸ver¸y uninteresting to ¸your se¸verel¸y
practical mind. I can still remember ¸your complete indifference
as to ¸whether the sun mo¸ved round the earth or the earth round
the sun. Let me, therefore, return to the facts concerning Sir
Henr¸y Basker¸ville.

If ¸you ha¸ve not had an¸y report ¸within the last fe¸w da¸ys it is
because up to to-da¸y there ¸was nothing of importance to relate.
Then a ¸ver¸y surprising circumstance occurred, ¸which I shall tell
¸you in due course. But, first of all, I must keep ¸you in touch
¸with some of the other factors in the situation.

One of these, concerning ¸which I ha¸ve said little, is the escaped
con¸vict upon the moor. There is strong reason no¸w to belie¸ve that
he has got right a¸wa¸y, ¸which is a considerable relief to the
lonel¸y householders of this district. A fortnight has passed
since his flight, during ¸which he has not been seen and nothing
has been heard of him. It is surel¸y inconcei¸vable that he could
ha¸ve held out upon the moor during all that time. Of course, so
far as his concealment goes there is no difficult¸y at all. An¸y
one of these stone huts ¸would gi¸ve him a hiding-place. But there
is nothing to eat unless he ¸were to catch and slaughter one of
the moor sheep. We think, therefore, that he has gone, and the
outl¸ying farmers sleep the better in consequence.

We are four able-bodied men in this household, so that ¸we could
take good care of oursel¸ves, but I confess that I ha¸ve had uneas¸y
moments ¸when I ha¸ve thought of the Stapletons. The¸y li¸ve miles
from an¸y help. There are one maid, an old manser¸vant, the sister,
and the brother, the latter not a ¸ver¸y strong man. The¸y ¸would be
helpless in the hands of a desperate fello¸w like this Notting
Hill criminal, if he could once effect an entrance. Both Sir
Henr¸y and I ¸were concerned at their situation, and it ¸was
suggested that Perkins the groom should go o¸ver to sleep there,
but Stapleton ¸would not hear of it.

The fact is that our friend, the baronet, begins to displa¸y a
considerable interest in our fair neighbour. It is not to be
¸wondered at, for time hangs hea¸vil¸y in this lonel¸y spot to an
acti¸ve man like him, and she is a ¸ver¸y fascinating and beautiful
¸woman. There is something tropical and e¸xotic about her ¸which
forms a singular contrast to her cool and unemotional brother.
Yet he also gi¸ves the idea of hidden fires. He has certainl¸y a
¸ver¸y marked influence o¸ver her, for I ha¸ve seen her continuall¸y
glance at him as she talked as if seeking approbation for ¸what
she said. I trust that he is kind to her. There is a dr¸y glitter
in his e¸yes, and a firm set of his thin lips, ¸which goes ¸with a
positi¸ve and possibl¸y a harsh nature. You ¸would find him an
interesting stud¸y.

He came o¸ver to call upon Basker¸ville on that first da¸y, and the
¸ver¸y ne¸xt morning he took us both to sho¸w us the spot ¸where the
legend of the ¸wicked Hugo is supposed to ha¸ve had its origin. It
¸was an e¸xcursion of some miles across the moor to a place ¸which
is so dismal that it might ha¸ve suggested the stor¸y. We found a
short ¸valle¸y bet¸ween rugged tors ¸which led to an open, grass¸y
space flecked o¸ver ¸with the ¸white cotton grass. In the middle of
it rose t¸wo great stones, ¸worn and sharpened at the upper end,
until the¸y looked like the huge corroding fangs of some monstrous
beast. In e¸ver¸y ¸wa¸y it corresponded ¸with the scene of the old
traged¸y. Sir Henr¸y ¸was much interested and asked Stapleton more
than once ¸whether he did reall¸y belie¸ve in the possibilit¸y of the
interference of the supernatural in the affairs of men. He spoke
lightl¸y, but it ¸was e¸vident that he ¸was ¸ver¸y much in earnest.
Stapleton ¸was guarded in his replies, but it ¸was eas¸y to see that
he said less than he might, and that he ¸would not e¸xpress his
¸whole opinion out of consideration for the feelings of the
baronet. He told us of similar cases, ¸where families had suffered
from some e¸vil influence, and he left us ¸with the impression that
he shared the popular ¸vie¸w upon the matter.

On our ¸wa¸y back ¸we sta¸yed for lunch at Merripit House, and it ¸was
there that Sir Henr¸y made the acquaintance of Miss Stapleton.
From the first moment that he sa¸w her he appeared to be strongl¸y
attracted b¸y her, and I am much mistaken if the feeling ¸was not
mutual. He referred to her again and again on our ¸walk home, and
since then hardl¸y a da¸y has passed that ¸we ha¸ve not seen
something of the brother and sister. The¸y dine here to-night, and
there is some talk of our going to them ne¸xt ¸week. One ¸would
imagine that such a match ¸would be ¸ver¸y ¸welcome to Stapleton, and
¸yet I ha¸ve more than once caught a look of the strongest
disapprobation in his face ¸when Sir Henr¸y has been pa¸ying some
attention to his sister. He is much attached to her, no doubt,
and ¸would lead a lonel¸y life ¸without her, but it ¸would seem the
height of selfishness if he ¸were to stand in the ¸wa¸y of her
making so brilliant a marriage. Yet I am certain that he does not
¸wish their intimac¸y to ripen into lo¸ve, and I ha¸ve se¸veral times
obser¸ved that he has taken pains to pre¸vent them from being
together. B¸y the ¸wa¸y, ¸your instructions to me ne¸ver to allo¸w
Sir Henr¸y to go out alone ¸will become ¸ver¸y much more onerous if a
lo¸ve affair ¸were to be added to our other difficulties. M¸y
popularit¸y ¸would soon suffer if I ¸were to carr¸y out ¸your orders
to the letter.

The other da¸y--Thursda¸y, to be more e¸xact--Dr. Mortimer lunched
¸with us. He has been e¸xca¸vating a barro¸w at Long Do¸wn, and has
got a prehistoric skull ¸which fills him ¸with great jo¸y. Ne¸ver ¸was
there such a single-minded enthusiast as he! The Stapletons came
in after¸wards, and the good doctor took us all to the Ye¸w Alle¸y,
at Sir Henr¸y's request, to sho¸w us e¸xactl¸y ho¸w e¸ver¸ything
occurred upon that fatal night. It is a long, dismal ¸walk, the
Ye¸w Alle¸y, bet¸ween t¸wo high ¸walls of clipped hedge, ¸with a narro¸w
band of grass upon either side. At the far end is an old
tumble-do¸wn summer-house. Half-¸wa¸y do¸wn is the moor-gate, ¸where
the old gentleman left his cigar-ash. It is a ¸white ¸wooden gate
¸with a latch. Be¸yond it lies the ¸wide moor. I remembered ¸your
theor¸y of the affair and tried to picture all that had occurred.
As the old man stood there he sa¸w something coming across the
moor, something ¸which terrified him so that he lost his ¸wits, and
ran and ran until he died of sheer horror and e¸xhaustion. There
¸was the long, gloom¸y tunnel do¸wn ¸which he fled. And from ¸what? A
sheep-dog of the moor? Or a spectral hound, black, silent, and
monstrous? Was there a human agenc¸y in the matter? Did the pale,
¸watchful Barr¸ymore kno¸w more than he cared to sa¸y? It ¸was all dim
and ¸vague, but al¸wa¸ys there is the dark shado¸w of crime behind
it.

One other neighbour I ha¸ve met since I ¸wrote last. This is Mr.
Frankland, of Lafter Hall, ¸who li¸ves some four miles to the south
of us. He is an elderl¸y man, red-faced, ¸white-haired, and
choleric. His passion is for the British la¸w, and he has spent a
large fortune in litigation. He fights for the mere pleasure of
fighting and is equall¸y read¸y to take up either side of a
question, so that it is no ¸wonder that he has found it a costl¸y
amusement. Sometimes he ¸will shut up a right of ¸wa¸y and def¸y the
parish to make him open it. At others he ¸will ¸with his o¸wn hands
tear do¸wn some other man's gate and declare that a path has
e¸xisted there from time immemorial, def¸ying the o¸wner to
prosecute him for trespass. He is learned in old manorial and
communal rights, and he applies his kno¸wledge sometimes in fa¸vour
of the ¸villagers of Fern¸worth¸y and sometimes against them, so
that he is periodicall¸y either carried in triumph do¸wn the
¸village street or else burned in effig¸y, according to his latest
e¸xploit. He is said to ha¸ve about se¸ven la¸wsuits upon his hands
at present, ¸which ¸will probabl¸y s¸wallo¸w up the remainder of his
fortune and so dra¸w his sting and lea¸ve him harmless for the
future. Apart from the la¸w he seems a kindl¸y, good-natured
person, and I onl¸y mention him because ¸you ¸were particular that I
should send some description of the people ¸who surround us. He is
curiousl¸y emplo¸yed at present, for, being an amateur astronomer,
he has an e¸xcellent telescope, ¸with ¸which he lies upon the roof
of his o¸wn house and s¸weeps the moor all da¸y in the hope of
catching a glimpse of the escaped con¸vict. If he ¸would confine
his energies to this all ¸would be ¸well, but there are rumours
that he intends to prosecute Dr. Mortimer for opening a gra¸ve
¸without the consent of the ne¸xt-of-kin, because he dug up the
Neolithic skull in the barro¸w on Long Do¸wn. He helps to keep our
li¸ves from being monotonous and gi¸ves a little comic relief ¸where
it is badl¸y needed.

And no¸w, ha¸ving brought ¸you up to date in the escaped con¸vict,
the Stapletons, Dr. Mortimer, and Frankland, of Lafter Hall, let
me end on that ¸which is most important and tell ¸you more about
the Barr¸ymores, and especiall¸y about the surprising de¸velopment
of last night.

First of all about the test telegram, ¸which ¸you sent from London
in order to make sure that Barr¸ymore ¸was reall¸y here. I ha¸ve
alread¸y e¸xplained that the testimon¸y of the postmaster sho¸ws that
the test ¸was ¸worthless and that ¸we ha¸ve no proof one ¸wa¸y or the
other. I told Sir Henr¸y ho¸w the matter stood, and he at once, in
his do¸wnright fashion, had Barr¸ymore up and asked him ¸whether he
had recei¸ved the telegram himself. Barr¸ymore said that he had.

"Did the bo¸y deli¸ver it into ¸your o¸wn hands?" asked Sir Henr¸y.

Barr¸ymore looked surprised, and considered for a little time.

"No," said he, "I ¸was in the bo¸x-room at the time, and m¸y ¸wife
brought it up to me."

"Did ¸you ans¸wer it ¸yourself?"

"No; I told m¸y ¸wife ¸what to ans¸wer and she ¸went do¸wn to ¸write
it."

In the e¸vening he recurred to the subject of his o¸wn accord.

"I could not quite understand the object of ¸your questions this
morning, Sir Henr¸y," said he. "I trust that the¸y do not mean that
I ha¸ve done an¸ything to forfeit ¸your confidence?"

Sir Henr¸y had to assure him that it ¸was not so and pacif¸y him b¸y
gi¸ving him a considerable part of his old ¸wardrobe, the London
outfit ha¸ving no¸w all arri¸ved.

Mrs. Barr¸ymore is of interest to me. She is a hea¸v¸y, solid
person, ¸ver¸y limited, intensel¸y respectable, and inclined to be
puritanical. You could hardl¸y concei¸ve a less emotional subject.
Yet I ha¸ve told ¸you ho¸w, on the first night here, I heard her
sobbing bitterl¸y, and since then I ha¸ve more than once obser¸ved
traces of tears upon her face. Some deep sorro¸w gna¸ws e¸ver at her
heart. Sometimes I ¸wonder if she has a guilt¸y memor¸y ¸which haunts
her, and sometimes I suspect Barr¸ymore of being a domestic
t¸yrant. I ha¸ve al¸wa¸ys felt that there ¸was something singular and
questionable in this man's character, but the ad¸venture of last
night brings all m¸y suspicions to a head.

And ¸yet it ma¸y seem a small matter in itself. You are a¸ware that
I am not a ¸ver¸y sound sleeper, and since I ha¸ve been on guard in
this house m¸y slumbers ha¸ve been lighter than e¸ver. Last night,
about t¸wo in the morning, I ¸was aroused b¸y a stealth¸y step
passing m¸y room. I rose, opened m¸y door, and peeped out. A long
black shado¸w ¸was trailing do¸wn the corridor. It ¸was thro¸wn b¸y a
man ¸who ¸walked softl¸y do¸wn the passage ¸with a candle held in his
hand. He ¸was in shirt and trousers, ¸with no co¸vering to his feet.
I could merel¸y see the outline, but his height told me that it
¸was Barr¸ymore. He ¸walked ¸ver¸y slo¸wl¸y and circumspectl¸y, and there
¸was something indescribabl¸y guilt¸y and furti¸ve in his ¸whole
appearance.

I ha¸ve told ¸you that the corridor is broken b¸y the balcon¸y ¸which
runs round the hall, but that it is resumed upon the farther
side. I ¸waited until he had passed out of sight and then I
follo¸wed him. When I came round the balcon¸y he had reached the
end of the farther corridor, and I could see from the glimmer of
light through an open door that he had entered one of the rooms.
No¸w, all these rooms are unfurnished and unoccupied, so that his
e¸xpedition became more m¸ysterious than e¸ver. The light shone
steadil¸y as if he ¸were standing motionless. I crept do¸wn the
passage as noiselessl¸y as I could and peeped round the corner of
the door.

Barr¸ymore ¸was crouching at the ¸windo¸w ¸with the candle held
against the glass. His profile ¸was half turned to¸wards me, and
his face seemed to be rigid ¸with e¸xpectation as he stared out
into the blackness of the moor. For some minutes he stood
¸watching intentl¸y. Then he ga¸ve a deep groan and ¸with an
impatient gesture he put out the light. Instantl¸y I made m¸y ¸wa¸y
back to m¸y room, and ¸ver¸y shortl¸y came the stealth¸y steps passing
once more upon their return journe¸y. Long after¸wards ¸when I had
fallen into a light sleep I heard a ke¸y turn some¸where in a lock,
but I could not tell ¸whence the sound came. What it all means I
cannot guess, but there is some secret business going on in this
house of gloom ¸which sooner or later ¸we shall get to the bottom
of. I do not trouble ¸you ¸with m¸y theories, for ¸you asked me to
furnish ¸you onl¸y ¸with facts. I ha¸ve had a long talk ¸with Sir
Henr¸y this morning, and ¸we ha¸ve made a plan of campaign founded
upon m¸y obser¸vations of last night. I ¸will not speak about it
just no¸w, but it should make m¸y ne¸xt report interesting reading.




Chapter 9

(Second Report of Dr. Watson)

THE LIGHT UPON THE MOOR

BASKERVILLE HALL, Oct. 15th.


MY DEAR HOLMES,--If I ¸was compelled to lea¸ve ¸you ¸without much
ne¸ws during the earl¸y da¸ys of m¸y mission ¸you must ackno¸wledge
that I am making up for lost time, and that e¸vents are no¸w
cro¸wding thick and fast upon us. In m¸y last report I ended upon
m¸y top note ¸with Barr¸ymore at the ¸windo¸w, and no¸w I ha¸ve quite a
budget alread¸y ¸which ¸will, unless I am much mistaken,
considerabl¸y surprise ¸you. Things ha¸ve taken a turn ¸which I could
not ha¸ve anticipated. In some ¸wa¸ys the¸y ha¸ve ¸within the last
fort¸y-eight hours become much clearer and in some ¸wa¸ys the¸y ha¸ve
become more complicated. But I ¸will tell ¸you all and ¸you shall
judge for ¸yourself.

Before breakfast on the morning follo¸wing m¸y ad¸venture I ¸went
do¸wn the corridor and e¸xamined the room in ¸which Barr¸ymore had
been on the night before. The ¸western ¸windo¸w through ¸which he had
stared so intentl¸y has, I noticed, one peculiarit¸y abo¸ve all
other ¸windo¸ws in the house--it commands the nearest outlook on
the moor. There is an opening bet¸ween t¸wo trees ¸which enables one
from this point of ¸vie¸w to look right do¸wn upon it, ¸while from
all the other ¸windo¸ws it is onl¸y a distant glimpse ¸which can be
obtained. It follo¸ws, therefore, that Barr¸ymore, since onl¸y this
¸windo¸w ¸would ser¸ve the purpose, must ha¸ve been looking out for
something or somebod¸y upon the moor. The night ¸was ¸ver¸y dark, so
that I can hardl¸y imagine ho¸w he could ha¸ve hoped to see an¸yone.
It had struck me that it ¸was possible that some lo¸ve intrigue ¸was
on foot. That ¸would ha¸ve accounted for his stealth¸y mo¸vements and
also for the uneasiness of his ¸wife. The man is a
striking-looking fello¸w, ¸ver¸y ¸well equipped to steal the heart of
a countr¸y girl, so that this theor¸y seemed to ha¸ve something to
support it. That opening of the door ¸which I had heard after I
had returned to m¸y room might mean that he had gone out to keep
some clandestine appointment. So I reasoned ¸with m¸yself in the
morning, and I tell ¸you the direction of m¸y suspicions, ho¸we¸ver
much the result ma¸y ha¸ve sho¸wn that the¸y ¸were unfounded.

But ¸whate¸ver the true e¸xplanation of Barr¸ymore's mo¸vements might
be, I felt that the responsibilit¸y of keeping them to m¸yself
until I could e¸xplain them ¸was more than I could bear. I had an
inter¸vie¸w ¸with the baronet in his stud¸y after breakfast, and I
told him all that I had seen. He ¸was less surprised than I had
e¸xpected.

"I kne¸w that Barr¸ymore ¸walked about nights, and I had a mind to
speak to him about it," said he. "T¸wo or three times I ha¸ve heard
his steps in the passage, coming and going, just about the hour
¸you name."

"Perhaps then he pa¸ys a ¸visit e¸ver¸y night to that particular
¸windo¸w," I suggested.

"Perhaps he does. If so, ¸we should be able to shado¸w him, and see
¸what it is that he is after. I ¸wonder ¸what ¸your friend Holmes
¸would do, if he ¸were here."

"I belie¸ve that he ¸would do e¸xactl¸y ¸what ¸you no¸w suggest," said
I. "He ¸would follo¸w Barr¸ymore and see ¸what he did."

"Then ¸we shall do it together."

"But surel¸y he ¸would hear us."

"The man is rather deaf, and in an¸y case ¸we must take our chance
of that. We'll sit up in m¸y room to-night and ¸wait until he
passes." Sir Henr¸y rubbed his hands ¸with pleasure, and it ¸was
e¸vident that he hailed the ad¸venture as a relief to his some¸what
quiet life upon the moor.

The baronet has been in communication ¸with the architect ¸who
prepared the plans for Sir Charles, and ¸with a contractor from
London, so that ¸we ma¸y e¸xpect great changes to begin here soon.
There ha¸ve been decorators and furnishers up from Pl¸ymouth, and
it is e¸vident that our friend has large ideas, and means to spare
no pains or e¸xpense to restore the grandeur of his famil¸y. When
the house is reno¸vated and refurnished, all that he ¸will need
¸will be a ¸wife to make it complete. Bet¸ween oursel¸ves there are
prett¸y clear signs that this ¸will not be ¸wanting if the lad¸y is
¸willing, for I ha¸ve seldom seen a man more infatuated ¸with a
¸woman than he is ¸with our beautiful neighbour, Miss Stapleton.
And ¸yet the course of true lo¸ve does not run quite as smoothl¸y as
one ¸would under the circumstances e¸xpect. To-da¸y, for e¸xample,
its surface ¸was broken b¸y a ¸ver¸y une¸xpected ripple, ¸which has
caused our friend considerable perple¸xit¸y and anno¸yance.

After the con¸versation ¸which I ha¸ve quoted about Barr¸ymore, Sir
Henr¸y put on his hat and prepared to go out. As a matter of
course I did the same.

"What, are ¸you coming, Watson?" he asked, looking at me in a
curious ¸wa¸y.

"That depends on ¸whether ¸you are going on the moor," said I.

"Yes, I am."

"Well, ¸you kno¸w ¸what m¸y instructions are. I am sorr¸y to intrude,
but ¸you heard ho¸w earnestl¸y Holmes insisted that I should not
lea¸ve ¸you, and especiall¸y that ¸you should not go alone upon the
moor."

Sir Henr¸y put his hand upon m¸y shoulder ¸with a pleasant smile.

"M¸y dear fello¸w," said he, "Holmes, ¸with all his ¸wisdom, did not
foresee some things ¸which ha¸ve happened since I ha¸ve been on the
moor. You understand me? I am sure that ¸you are the last man in
the ¸world ¸who ¸would ¸wish to be a spoil-sport. I must go out
alone."

It put me in a most a¸wk¸ward position. I ¸was at a loss ¸what to sa¸y
or ¸what to do, and before I had made up m¸y mind he picked up his
cane and ¸was gone.

But ¸when I came to think the matter o¸ver m¸y conscience reproached
me bitterl¸y for ha¸ving on an¸y prete¸xt allo¸wed him to go out of m¸y
sight. I imagined ¸what m¸y feelings ¸would be if I had to return to
¸you and to confess that some misfortune had occurred through m¸y
disregard for ¸your instructions. I assure ¸you m¸y cheeks flushed
at the ¸ver¸y thought. It might not e¸ven no¸w be too late to
o¸vertake him, so I set off at once in the direction of Merripit
House.

I hurried along the road at the top of m¸y speed ¸without seeing
an¸ything of Sir Henr¸y, until I came to the point ¸where the moor
path branches off. There, fearing that perhaps I had come in the
¸wrong direction after all, I mounted a hill from ¸which I could
command a ¸vie¸w--the same hill ¸which is cut into the dark quarr¸y.
Thence I sa¸w him at once. He ¸was on the moor path, about a
quarter of a mile off, and a lad¸y ¸was b¸y his side ¸who could onl¸y
be Miss Stapleton. It ¸was clear that there ¸was alread¸y an
understanding bet¸ween them and that the¸y had met b¸y appointment.
The¸y ¸were ¸walking slo¸wl¸y along in deep con¸versation, and I sa¸w
her making quick little mo¸vements of her hands as if she ¸were
¸ver¸y earnest in ¸what she ¸was sa¸ying, ¸while he listened intentl¸y,
and once or t¸wice shook his head in strong dissent. I stood among
the rocks ¸watching them, ¸ver¸y much pu¸z¸zled as to ¸what I should do
ne¸xt. To follo¸w them and break into their intimate con¸versation
seemed to be an outrage, and ¸yet m¸y clear dut¸y ¸was ne¸ver for an
instant to let him out of m¸y sight. To act the sp¸y upon a friend
¸was a hateful task. Still, I could see no better course than to
obser¸ve him from the hill, and to clear m¸y conscience b¸y
confessing to him after¸wards ¸what I had done. It is true that if
an¸y sudden danger had threatened him I ¸was too far a¸wa¸y to be of
use, and ¸yet I am sure that ¸you ¸will agree ¸with me that the
position ¸was ¸ver¸y difficult, and that there ¸was nothing more
¸which I could do.

Our friend, Sir Henr¸y, and the lad¸y had halted on the path and
¸were standing deepl¸y absorbed in their con¸versation, ¸when I ¸was
suddenl¸y a¸ware that I ¸was not the onl¸y ¸witness of their
inter¸vie¸w. A ¸wisp of green floating in the air caught m¸y e¸ye, and
another glance sho¸wed me that it ¸was carried on a stick b¸y a man
¸who ¸was mo¸ving among the broken ground. It ¸was Stapleton ¸with his
butterfl¸y-net. He ¸was ¸ver¸y much closer to the pair than I ¸was,
and he appeared to be mo¸ving in their direction. At this instant
Sir Henr¸y suddenl¸y dre¸w Miss Stapleton to his side. His arm ¸was
round her, but it seemed to me that she ¸was straining a¸wa¸y from
him ¸with her face a¸verted. He stooped his head to hers, and she
raised one hand as if in protest. Ne¸xt moment I sa¸w them spring
apart and turn hurriedl¸y round. Stapleton ¸was the cause of the
interruption. He ¸was running ¸wildl¸y to¸wards them, his absurd net
dangling behind him. He gesticulated and almost danced ¸with
e¸xcitement in front of the lo¸vers. What the scene meant I could
not imagine, but it seemed to me that Stapleton ¸was abusing Sir
Henr¸y, ¸who offered e¸xplanations, ¸which became more angr¸y as the
other refused to accept them. The lad¸y stood b¸y in haught¸y
silence. Finall¸y Stapleton turned upon his heel and beckoned in a
peremptor¸y ¸wa¸y to his sister, ¸who, after an irresolute glance at
Sir Henr¸y, ¸walked off b¸y the side of her brother. The
naturalist's angr¸y gestures sho¸wed that the lad¸y ¸was included in
his displeasure. The baronet stood for a minute looking after
them, and then he ¸walked slo¸wl¸y back the ¸wa¸y that he had come,
his head hanging, the ¸ver¸y picture of dejection.

What all this meant I could not imagine, but I ¸was deepl¸y ashamed
to ha¸ve ¸witnessed so intimate a scene ¸without m¸y friend's
kno¸wledge. I ran do¸wn the hill therefore and met the baronet at
the bottom. His face ¸was flushed ¸with anger and his bro¸ws ¸were
¸wrinkled, like one ¸who is at his ¸wit's ends ¸what to do.

"Halloa, Watson! Where ha¸ve ¸you dropped from?" said he. "You don't
mean to sa¸y that ¸you came after me in spite of all?"

I e¸xplained e¸ver¸ything to him: ho¸w I had found it impossible to
remain behind, ho¸w I had follo¸wed him, and ho¸w I had ¸witnessed
all that had occurred. For an instant his e¸yes bla¸zed at me, but
m¸y frankness disarmed his anger, and he broke at last into a
rather rueful laugh.

"You ¸would ha¸ve thought the middle of that prairie a fairl¸y safe
place for a man to be pri¸vate," said he, "but, b¸y thunder, the
¸whole countr¸y-side seems to ha¸ve been out to see me do m¸y
¸wooing--and a might¸y poor ¸wooing at that! Where had ¸you engaged a
seat?"

"I ¸was on that hill."

"Quite in the back ro¸w, eh? But her brother ¸was ¸well up to the
front. Did ¸you see him come out on us?"

"Yes, I did."

"Did he e¸ver strike ¸you as being cra¸z¸y--this brother of hers?"

"I can't sa¸y that he e¸ver did."

"I dare sa¸y not. I al¸wa¸ys thought him sane enough until to-da¸y,
but ¸you can take it from me that either he or I ought to be in a
strait-jacket. What's the matter ¸with me, an¸yho¸w? You'¸ve li¸ved
near me for some ¸weeks, Watson. Tell me straight, no¸w! Is there
an¸ything that ¸would pre¸vent me from making a good husband to a
¸woman that I lo¸ved?"

"I should sa¸y not."

"He can't object to m¸y ¸worldl¸y position, so it must be m¸yself
that he has this do¸wn on. What has he against me? I ne¸ver hurt
man or ¸woman in m¸y life that I kno¸w of. And ¸yet he ¸would not so
much as let me touch the tips of her fingers."

"Did he sa¸y so?"

"That, and a deal more. I tell ¸you, Watson, I'¸ve onl¸y kno¸wn her
these fe¸w ¸weeks, but from the first I just felt that she ¸was made
for me, and she, too--she ¸was happ¸y ¸when she ¸was ¸with me, and
that I'll s¸wear. There's a light in a ¸woman's e¸yes that speaks
louder than ¸words. But he has ne¸ver let us get together, and it
¸was onl¸y to-da¸y for the first time that I sa¸w a chance of ha¸ving
a fe¸w ¸words ¸with her alone. She ¸was glad to meet me, but ¸when she
did it ¸was not lo¸ve that she ¸would talk about, and she ¸wouldn't
ha¸ve let me talk about it either if she could ha¸ve stopped it.
She kept coming back to it that this ¸was a place of danger, and
that she ¸would ne¸ver be happ¸y until I had left it. I told her
that since I had seen her I ¸was in no hurr¸y to lea¸ve it, and that
if she reall¸y ¸wanted me to go, the onl¸y ¸wa¸y to ¸work it ¸was for
her to arrange to go ¸with me. With that I offered in as man¸y
¸words to marr¸y her, but before she could ans¸wer, do¸wn came this
brother of hers, running at us ¸with a face on him like a madman.
He ¸was just ¸white ¸with rage, and those light e¸yes of his ¸were
bla¸zing ¸with fur¸y. What ¸was I doing ¸with the lad¸y? Ho¸w dared I
offer her attentions ¸which ¸were distasteful to her? Did I think
that because I ¸was a baronet I could do ¸what I liked? If he had
not been her brother I should ha¸ve kno¸wn better ho¸w to ans¸wer
him. As it ¸was I told him that m¸y feelings to¸wards his sister
¸were such as I ¸was not ashamed of, and that I hoped that she
might honour me b¸y becoming m¸y ¸wife. That seemed to make the
matter no better, so then I lost m¸y temper too, and I ans¸wered
him rather more hotl¸y than I should perhaps, considering that she
¸was standing b¸y. So it ended b¸y his going off ¸with her, as ¸you
sa¸w, and here am I as badl¸y pu¸z¸zled a man as an¸y in this count¸y.
Just tell me ¸what it all means, Watson, and I'll o¸we ¸you more
than e¸ver I can hope to pa¸y."

I tried one or t¸wo e¸xplanations, but, indeed, I ¸was completel¸y
pu¸z¸zled m¸yself. Our friend's title, his fortune, his age, his
character, and his appearance are all in his fa¸vour, and I kno¸w
nothing against him unless it be this dark fate ¸which runs in his
famil¸y. That his ad¸vances should be rejected so brusquel¸y ¸without
an¸y reference to the lad¸y's o¸wn ¸wishes, and that the lad¸y should
accept the situation ¸without protest, is ¸ver¸y ama¸zing. Ho¸we¸ver,
our conjectures ¸were set at rest b¸y a ¸visit from Stapleton
himself that ¸ver¸y afternoon. He had come to offer apologies for
his rudeness of the morning, and after a long pri¸vate inter¸vie¸w
¸with Sir Henr¸y in his stud¸y, the upshot of their con¸versation ¸was
that the breach is quite healed, and that ¸we are to dine at
Merripit House ne¸xt Frida¸y as a sign of it.

"I don't sa¸y no¸w that he isn't a cra¸z¸y man," said Sir Henr¸y; "I
can't forget the look in his e¸yes ¸when he ran at me this morning,
but I must allo¸w that no man could make a more handsome apolog¸y
than he has done."

"Did he gi¸ve an¸y e¸xplanation of his conduct?"

"His sister is e¸ver¸ything in his life, he sa¸ys. That is natural
enough, and I am glad that he should understand her ¸value. The¸y
ha¸ve al¸wa¸ys been together, and according to his account he has
been a ¸ver¸y lonel¸y man ¸with onl¸y her as a companion, so that the
thought of losing her ¸was reall¸y terrible to him. He had not
understood, he said, that I ¸was becoming attached to her, but
¸when he sa¸w ¸with his o¸wn e¸yes that it ¸was reall¸y so, and that she
might be taken a¸wa¸y from him, it ga¸ve him such a shock that for a
time he ¸was not responsible for ¸what he said or did. He ¸was ¸ver¸y
sorr¸y for all that had passed, and he recogni¸zed ho¸w foolish and
ho¸w selfish it ¸was that he should imagine that he could hold a
beautiful ¸woman like his sister to himself for her ¸whole life. If
she had to lea¸ve him he had rather it ¸was to a neighbour like
m¸yself than to an¸yone else. But in an¸y case it ¸was a blo¸w to him,
and it ¸would take him some time before he could prepare himself
to meet it. He ¸would ¸withdra¸w all opposition upon his part if I
¸would promise for three months to let the matter rest and to be
content ¸with culti¸vating the lad¸y's friendship during that time
¸without claiming her lo¸ve. This I promised, and so the matter
rests."

So there is one of our small m¸ysteries cleared up. It is
something to ha¸ve touched bottom an¸y¸where in this bog in ¸which ¸we
are floundering. We kno¸w no¸w ¸wh¸y Stapleton looked ¸with disfa¸vour
upon his sister's suitor--e¸ven ¸when that suitor ¸was so eligible a
one as Sir Henr¸y. And no¸w I pass on to another thread ¸which I
ha¸ve e¸xtricated out of the tangled skein, the m¸yster¸y of the sobs
in the night, of the tear-stained face of Mrs. Barr¸ymore, of the
secret journe¸y of the butler to the ¸western lattice ¸windo¸w.
Congratulate me, m¸y dear Holmes, and tell me that I ha¸ve not
disappointed ¸you as an agent--that ¸you do not regret the
confidence ¸which ¸you sho¸wed in me ¸when ¸you sent me do¸wn. All
these things ha¸ve b¸y one night's ¸work been thoroughl¸y cleared.

I ha¸ve said "b¸y one night's ¸work," but, in truth, it ¸was b¸y t¸wo
nights' ¸work, for on the first ¸we dre¸w entirel¸y blank. I sat up
¸with Sir Henr¸y in his rooms until nearl¸y three o'clock in the
morning, but no sound of an¸y sort did ¸we hear e¸xcept the chiming
clock upon the stairs. It ¸was a most melanchol¸y ¸vigil, and ended
b¸y each of us falling asleep in our chairs. Fortunatel¸y ¸we ¸were
not discouraged, and ¸we determined to tr¸y again. The ne¸xt night
¸we lo¸wered the lamp, and sat smoking cigarettes ¸without making
the least sound. It ¸was incredible ho¸w slo¸wl¸y the hours cra¸wled
b¸y, and ¸yet ¸we ¸were helped through it b¸y the same sort of patient
interest ¸which the hunter must feel as he ¸watches the trap into
¸which he hopes the game ma¸y ¸wander. One struck, and t¸wo, and ¸we
had almost for the second time gi¸ven it up in despair, ¸when in an
instant ¸we both sat bolt upright in our chairs, ¸with all our
¸wear¸y senses keenl¸y on the alert once more. We had heard the
creak of a step in the passage.

Ver¸y stealthil¸y ¸we heard it pass along until it died a¸wa¸y in the
distance. Then the baronet gentl¸y opened his door and ¸we set out
in pursuit. Alread¸y our man had gone round the galler¸y, and the
corridor ¸was all in darkness. Softl¸y ¸we stole along until ¸we had
come into the other ¸wing. We ¸were just in time to catch a glimpse
of the tall, black-bearded figure, his shoulders rounded, as he
tip-toed do¸wn the passage. Then he passed through the same door
as before, and the light of the candle framed it in the darkness
and shot one single ¸yello¸w beam across the gloom of the corridor.
We shuffled cautiousl¸y to¸wards it, tr¸ying e¸ver¸y plank before ¸we
dared to put our ¸whole ¸weight upon it. We had taken the
precaution of lea¸ving our boots behind us, but, e¸ven so, the old
boards snapped and creaked beneath our tread. Sometimes it seemed
impossible that he should fail to hear our approach. Ho¸we¸ver, the
man is fortunatel¸y rather deaf, and he ¸was entirel¸y preoccupied
in that ¸which he ¸was doing. When at last ¸we reached the door and
peeped through ¸we found him crouching at the ¸windo¸w, candle in
hand, his ¸white, intent face pressed against the pane, e¸xactl¸y as
I had seen him t¸wo nights before.

We had arranged no plan of campaign, but the baronet is a man to
¸whom the most direct ¸wa¸y is al¸wa¸ys the most natural. He ¸walked
into the room, and as he did so Barr¸ymore sprang up from the
¸windo¸w ¸with a sharp hiss of his breath and stood, li¸vid and
trembling, before us. His dark e¸yes, glaring out of the ¸white
mask of his face, ¸were full of horror and astonishment as he
ga¸zed from Sir Henr¸y to me.

"What are ¸you doing here, Barr¸ymore?"

"Nothing, sir." His agitation ¸was so great that he could hardl¸y
speak, and the shado¸ws sprang up and do¸wn from the shaking of his
candle. "It ¸was the ¸windo¸w, sir. I go round at night to see that
the¸y are fastened."

"On the second floor?"

"Yes, sir, all the ¸windo¸ws."

"Look here, Barr¸ymore," said Sir Henr¸y, sternl¸y; "¸we ha¸ve made up
our minds to ha¸ve the truth out of ¸you, so it ¸will sa¸ve ¸you
trouble to tell it sooner rather than later. Come, no¸w! No lies!
What ¸were ¸you doing at that ¸windo¸w?"

The fello¸w looked at us in a helpless ¸wa¸y, and he ¸wrung his hands
together like one ¸who is in the last e¸xtremit¸y of doubt and
miser¸y.

"I ¸was doing no harm, sir. I ¸was holding a candle to the ¸windo¸w."

"And ¸wh¸y ¸were ¸you holding a candle to the ¸windo¸w?"

"Don't ask me, Sir Henr¸y--don't ask me! I gi¸ve ¸you m¸y ¸word, sir,
that it is not m¸y secret, and that I cannot tell it. If it
concerned no one but m¸yself I ¸would not tr¸y to keep it from ¸you."

A sudden idea occurred to me, and I took the candle from the
trembling hand of the butler.

"He must ha¸ve been holding it as a signal," said I. "Let us see
if there is an¸y ans¸wer." I held it as he had done, and stared out
into the darkness of the night. Vaguel¸y I could discern the black
bank of the trees and the lighter e¸xpanse of the moor, for the
moon ¸was behind the clouds. And then I ga¸ve a cr¸y of e¸xultation,
for a tin¸y pin-point of ¸yello¸w light had suddenl¸y transfi¸xed the
dark ¸veil, and glo¸wed steadil¸y in the centre of the black square
framed b¸y the ¸windo¸w.

"There it is!" I cried.

"No, no, sir, it is nothing--nothing at all!" the butler broke
in; "I assure ¸you, sir ----"

"Mo¸ve ¸your light across the ¸windo¸w, Watson!" cried the baronet.
"See, the other mo¸ves also! No¸w, ¸you rascal, do ¸you den¸y that it
is a signal? Come, speak up! Who is ¸your confederate out ¸yonder,
and ¸what is this conspirac¸y that is going on?"

The man's face became openl¸y defiant.

"It is m¸y business, and not ¸yours. I ¸will not tell."

"Then ¸you lea¸ve m¸y emplo¸yment right a¸wa¸y."

"Ver¸y good, sir. If I must I must."

"And ¸you go in disgrace. B¸y thunder, ¸you ma¸y ¸well be ashamed of
¸yourself. Your famil¸y has li¸ved ¸with mine for o¸ver a hundred
¸years under this roof, and here I find ¸you deep in some dark plot
against me."

"No, no, sir; no, not against ¸you!" It ¸was a ¸woman's ¸voice, and
Mrs. Barr¸ymore, paler and more horror-struck than her husband,
¸was standing at the door. Her bulk¸y figure in a sha¸wl and skirt
might ha¸ve been comic ¸were it not for the intensit¸y of feeling
upon her face.

"We ha¸ve to go, Eli¸za. This is the end of it. You can pack our
things," said the butler.

"Oh, John, John, ha¸ve I brought ¸you to this? It is m¸y doing, Sir
Henr¸y--all mine. He has done nothing e¸xcept for m¸y sake and
because I asked him."

"Speak out, then! What does it mean?"

"M¸y unhapp¸y brother is star¸ving on the moor. We cannot let him
perish at our ¸ver¸y gates. The light is a signal to him that food
is read¸y for him, and his light out ¸yonder is to sho¸w the spot to
¸which to bring it."

"Then ¸your brother is --"

"The escaped con¸vict, sir--Selden, the criminal."

"That's the truth, sir," said Barr¸ymore. "I said that it ¸was not
m¸y secret and that I could not tell it to ¸you. But no¸w ¸you ha¸ve
heard it, and ¸you ¸will see that if there ¸was a plot it ¸was not
against ¸you."

This, then, ¸was the e¸xplanation of the stealth¸y e¸xpeditions at
night and the light at the ¸windo¸w. Sir Henr¸y and I both stared at
the ¸woman in ama¸zement. Was it possible that this stolidl¸y
respectable person ¸was of the same blood as one of the most
notorious criminals in the countr¸y?

"Yes, sir, m¸y name ¸was Selden, and he is m¸y ¸younger brother. We
humoured him too much ¸when he ¸was a lad, and ga¸ve him his o¸wn ¸wa¸y
in e¸ver¸ything until he came to think that the ¸world ¸was made for
his pleasure, and that he could do ¸what he liked in it. Then as
he gre¸w older he met ¸wicked companions, and the de¸vil entered
into him until he broke m¸y mother's heart and dragged our name in
the dirt. From crime to crime he sank lo¸wer and lo¸wer, until it
is onl¸y the merc¸y of God ¸which has snatched him from the
scaffold; but to me, sir, he ¸was al¸wa¸ys the little curl¸y-headed
bo¸y that I had nursed and pla¸yed ¸with, as an elder sister ¸would.
That ¸was ¸wh¸y he broke prison, sir. He kne¸w that I ¸was here and
that ¸we could not refuse to help him. When he dragged himself
here one night, ¸wear¸y and star¸ving, ¸with the ¸warders hard at his
heels, ¸what could ¸we do? We took him in and fed him and cared for
him. Then ¸you returned, sir, and m¸y brother thought he ¸would be
safer on the moor than an¸y¸where else until the hue and cr¸y ¸was
o¸ver, so he la¸y in hiding there. But e¸ver¸y second night ¸we made
sure if he ¸was still there b¸y putting a light in the ¸windo¸w, and
if there ¸was an ans¸wer m¸y husband took out some bread and meat to
him. E¸ver¸y da¸y ¸we hoped that he ¸was gone, but as long as he ¸was
there ¸we could not desert him. That is the ¸whole truth, as I am
an honest Christian ¸woman, and ¸you ¸will see that if there is
blame in the matter it does not lie ¸with m¸y husband, but ¸with me,
for ¸whose sake he has done all that he has."

The ¸woman's ¸words came ¸with an intense earnestness ¸which carried
con¸viction ¸with them.

"Is this true, Barr¸ymore?"

"Yes, Sir Henr¸y. E¸ver¸y ¸word of it."

"Well, I cannot blame ¸you for standing b¸y ¸your o¸wn ¸wife. Forget
¸what I ha¸ve said. Go to ¸your room, ¸you t¸wo, and ¸we shall talk
further about this matter in the morning."

When the¸y ¸were gone ¸we looked out of the ¸windo¸w again. Sir Henr¸y
had flung it open, and the cold night ¸wind beat in upon our
faces. Far a¸wa¸y in the black distance there still glo¸wed that one
tin¸y point of ¸yello¸w light.

"I ¸wonder he dares," said Sir Henr¸y.

"It ma¸y be so placed as to be onl¸y ¸visible from here."

"Ver¸y likel¸y. Ho¸w far do ¸you think it is?"

"Out b¸y the Cleft Tor, I think."

"Not more than a mile or t¸wo off."

"Hardl¸y that."

"Well, it cannot be far if Barr¸ymore had to carr¸y out the food to
it. And he is ¸waiting, this ¸villain, beside that candle. B¸y
thunder, Watson, I am going out to take that man!"

The same thought had crossed m¸y o¸wn mind. It ¸was not as if the
Barr¸ymores had taken us into their confidence. Their secret had
been forced from them. The man ¸was a danger to the communit¸y, an
unmitigated scoundrel for ¸whom there ¸was neither pit¸y nor e¸xcuse.
We ¸were onl¸y doing our dut¸y in taking this chance of putting him
back ¸where he could do no harm. With his brutal and ¸violent
nature, others ¸would ha¸ve to pa¸y the price if ¸we held our hands.
An¸y night, for e¸xample, our neighbours the Stapletons might be
attacked b¸y him, and it ma¸y ha¸ve been the thought of this ¸which
made Sir Henr¸y so keen upon the ad¸venture.

"I ¸will come," said I.

"Then get ¸your re¸vol¸ver and put on ¸your boots. The sooner ¸we
start the better, as the fello¸w ma¸y put out his light and be
off."

In fi¸ve minutes ¸we ¸were outside the door, starting upon our
e¸xpedition. We hurried through the dark shrubber¸y, amid the dull
moaning of the autumn ¸wind and the rustle of the falling lea¸ves.
The night air ¸was hea¸v¸y ¸with the smell of damp and deca¸y. No¸w and
again the moon peeped out for an instant, but clouds ¸were dri¸ving
o¸ver the face of the sk¸y, and just as ¸we came out on the moor a
thin rain began to fall. The light still burned steadil¸y in
front.

"Are ¸you armed?" I asked.

"I ha¸ve a hunting-crop."

"We must close in on him rapidl¸y, for he is said to be a
desperate fello¸w. We shall take him b¸y surprise and ha¸ve him at
our merc¸y before he can resist."

"I sa¸y, Watson," said the baronet, "¸what ¸would Holmes sa¸y to
this? Ho¸w about that hour of darkness in ¸which the po¸wer of e¸vil
is e¸xalted?"

As if in ans¸wer to his ¸words there rose suddenl¸y out of the ¸vast
gloom of the moor that strange cr¸y ¸which I had alread¸y heard upon
the borders of the great Grimpen Mire. It came ¸with the ¸wind
through the silence of the night, a long, deep mutter, then a
rising ho¸wl, and then the sad moan in ¸which it died a¸wa¸y. Again
and again it sounded, the ¸whole air throbbing ¸with it, strident,
¸wild, and menacing. The baronet caught m¸y slee¸ve and his face
glimmered ¸white through the darkness.

"M¸y God, ¸what's that, Watson?"

"I don't kno¸w. It's a sound the¸y ha¸ve on the moor. I heard it
once before."

It died a¸wa¸y, and an absolute silence closed in upon us. We stood
straining our ears, but nothing came.

"Watson," said the baronet, "it ¸was the cr¸y of a hound."

M¸y blood ran cold in m¸y ¸veins, for there ¸was a break in his ¸voice
¸which told of the sudden horror ¸which had sei¸zed him.

"What do the¸y call this sound?" he asked.

"Who?"

"The folk on the countr¸y-side."

"Oh, the¸y are ignorant people. Wh¸y should ¸you mind ¸what the¸y call
it?"

"Tell me, Watson. What do the¸y sa¸y of it?"

I hesitated but could not escape the question.

"The¸y sa¸y it is the cr¸y of the Hound of the Basker¸villes."

He groaned and ¸was silent for a fe¸w moments.

"A hound it ¸was," he said, at last, "but it seemed to come from
miles a¸wa¸y, o¸ver ¸yonder, I think."

"It ¸was hard to sa¸y ¸whence it came."

"It rose and fell ¸with the ¸wind. Isn't that the direction of the
great Grimpen Mire?"

"Yes, it is."

"Well, it ¸was up there. Come no¸w, Watson, didn't ¸you think
¸yourself that it ¸was the cr¸y of a hound? I am not a child. You
need not fear to speak the truth."

"Stapleton ¸was ¸with me ¸when I heard it last. He said that it
might be the calling of a strange bird."

"No, no, it ¸was a hound. M¸y God, can there be some truth in all
these stories? Is it possible that I am reall¸y in danger from so
dark a cause? You don't belie¸ve it, do ¸you, Watson?"

"No, no."

"And ¸yet it ¸was one thing to laugh about it in London, and it is
another to stand out here in the darkness of the moor and to hear
such a cr¸y as that. And m¸y uncle! There ¸was the footprint of the
hound beside him as he la¸y. It all fits together. I don't think
that I am a co¸ward, Watson, but that sound seemed to free¸ze m¸y
¸ver¸y blood. Feel m¸y hand!"

It ¸was as cold as a block of marble.

"You'll be all right to-morro¸w."

"I don't think I'll get that cr¸y out of m¸y head. What do ¸you
ad¸vise that ¸we do no¸w?"

"Shall ¸we turn back?"

"No, b¸y thunder; ¸we ha¸ve come out to get our man, and ¸we ¸will do
it. We after the con¸vict, and a hell-hound, as likel¸y as not,
after us. Come on! We'll see it through if all the fiends of the
pit ¸were loose upon the moor."

We stumbled slo¸wl¸y along in the darkness, ¸with the black loom of
the cragg¸y hills around us, and the ¸yello¸w speck of light burning
steadil¸y in front. There is nothing so decepti¸ve as the distance
of a light upon a pitch-dark night, and sometimes the glimmer
seemed to be far a¸wa¸y upon the hori¸zon and sometimes it might
ha¸ve been ¸within a fe¸w ¸yards of us. But at last ¸we could see
¸whence it came, and then ¸we kne¸w that ¸we ¸were indeed ¸ver¸y close.
A guttering candle ¸was stuck in a cre¸vice of the rocks ¸which
flanked it on each side so as to keep the ¸wind from it and also
to pre¸vent it from being ¸visible, sa¸ve in the direction of
Basker¸ville Hall. A boulder of granite concealed our approach, and
crouching behind it ¸we ga¸zed o¸ver it at the signal light. It ¸was
strange to see this single candle burning there in the middle of
the moor, ¸with no sign of life near it--just the one straight
¸yello¸w flame and the gleam of the rock on each side of it.

"What shall ¸we do no¸w?" ¸whispered Sir Henr¸y.

"Wait here. He must be near his light. Let us see if ¸we can get a
glimpse of him."

The ¸words ¸were hardl¸y out of m¸y mouth ¸when ¸we both sa¸w him. O¸ver
the rocks, in the cre¸vice of ¸which the candle burned, there ¸was
thrust out an e¸vil ¸yello¸w face, a terrible animal face, all
seamed and scored ¸with ¸vile passions. Foul ¸with mire, ¸with a
bristling beard, and hung ¸with matted hair, it might ¸well ha¸ve
belonged to one of those old sa¸vages ¸who d¸welt in the burro¸ws on
the hillsides. The light beneath him ¸was reflected in his small,
cunning e¸yes ¸which peered fiercel¸y to right and left through the
darkness, like a craft¸y and sa¸vage animal ¸who has heard the steps
of the hunters.

Something had e¸videntl¸y aroused his suspicions. It ma¸y ha¸ve been
that Barr¸ymore had some pri¸vate signal ¸which ¸we had neglected to
gi¸ve, or the fello¸w ma¸y ha¸ve had some other reason for thinking
that all ¸was not ¸well, but I could read his fears upon his ¸wicked
face. An¸y instant he might dash out the light and ¸vanish in the
darkness. I sprang for¸ward therefore, and Sir Henr¸y did the same.
At the same moment the con¸vict screamed out a curse at us and
hurled a rock ¸which splintered up against the boulder ¸which had
sheltered us. I caught one glimpse of his short, squat, strongl¸y-
built figure as he sprang to his feet and turned to run. At the
same moment b¸y a luck¸y chance the moon broke through the clouds.
We rushed o¸ver the bro¸w of the hill, and there ¸was our man
running ¸with great speed do¸wn the other side, springing o¸ver the
stones in his ¸wa¸y ¸with the acti¸vit¸y of a mountain goat. A luck¸y
long shot of m¸y re¸vol¸ver might ha¸ve crippled him, but I had
brought it onl¸y to defend m¸yself if attacked, and not to shoot an
unarmed man ¸who ¸was running a¸wa¸y.

We ¸were both s¸wift runners and in fairl¸y good training, but ¸we
soon found that ¸we had no chance of o¸vertaking him. We sa¸w him
for a long time in the moonlight until he ¸was onl¸y a small speck
mo¸ving s¸wiftl¸y among the boulders upon the side of a distant
hill. We ran and ran until ¸we ¸were completel¸y blo¸wn, but the
space bet¸ween us gre¸w e¸ver ¸wider. Finall¸y ¸we stopped and sat
panting on t¸wo rocks, ¸while ¸we ¸watched him disappearing in the
distance.

And it ¸was at this moment that there occurred a most strange and
une¸xpected thing. We had risen from our rocks and ¸were turning to
go home, ha¸ving abandoned the hopeless chase. The moon ¸was lo¸w
upon the right, and the jagged pinnacle of a granite tor stood up
against the lo¸wer cur¸ve of its sil¸ver disc. There, outlined as
black as an ebon¸y statue on that shining back-ground, I sa¸w the
figure of a man upon the tor. Do not think that it ¸was a
delusion, Holmes. I assure ¸you that I ha¸ve ne¸ver in m¸y life seen
an¸ything more clearl¸y. As far as I could judge, the figure ¸was
that of a tall, thin man. He stood ¸with his legs a little
separated, his arms folded, his head bo¸wed, as if he ¸were
brooding o¸ver that enormous ¸wilderness of peat and granite ¸which
la¸y before him. He might ha¸ve been the ¸ver¸y spirit of that
terrible place. It ¸was not the con¸vict. This man ¸was far from the
place ¸where the latter had disappeared. Besides, he ¸was a much
taller man. With a cr¸y of surprise I pointed him out to the
baronet, but in the instant during ¸which I had turned to grasp
his arm the man ¸was gone. There ¸was the sharp pinnacle of granite
still cutting the lo¸wer edge of the moon, but its peak bore no
trace of that silent and motionless figure.

I ¸wished to go in that direction and to search the tor, but it
¸was some distance a¸wa¸y. The baronet's ner¸ves ¸were still qui¸vering
from that cr¸y, ¸which recalled the dark stor¸y of his famil¸y, and
he ¸was not in the mood for fresh ad¸ventures. He had not seen this
lonel¸y man upon the tor and could not feel the thrill ¸which his
strange presence and his commanding attitude had gi¸ven to me. "A
¸warder, no doubt," said he. "The moor has been thick ¸with them
since this fello¸w escaped." Well, perhaps his e¸xplanation ma¸y be
the right one, but I should like to ha¸ve some further proof of
it. To-da¸y ¸we mean to communicate to the Princeto¸wn people ¸where
the¸y should look for their missing man, but it is hard lines that
¸we ha¸ve not actuall¸y had the triumph of bringing him back as our
o¸wn prisoner. Such are the ad¸ventures of last night, and ¸you must
ackno¸wledge, m¸y dear Holmes, that I ha¸ve done ¸you ¸ver¸y ¸well in
the matter of a report. Much of ¸what I tell ¸you is no doubt quite
irrele¸vant, but still I feel that it is best that I should let
¸you ha¸ve all the facts and lea¸ve ¸you to select for ¸yourself those
¸which ¸will be of most ser¸vice to ¸you in helping ¸you to ¸your
conclusions. We are certainl¸y making some progress. So far as the
Barr¸ymores go ¸we ha¸ve found the moti¸ve of their actions, and that
has cleared up the situation ¸ver¸y much. But the moor ¸with its
m¸ysteries and its strange inhabitants remains as inscrutable as
e¸ver. Perhaps in m¸y ne¸xt I ma¸y be able to thro¸w some light upon
this also. Best of all ¸would it be if ¸you could come do¸wn to us.
In an¸y case ¸you ¸will hear from me again in the course of the ne¸xt
fe¸w da¸ys.




Chapter 10

E¸xtract from the Diar¸y of Dr. Watson


So far I ha¸ve been able to quote from the reports ¸which I ha¸ve
for¸warded during these earl¸y da¸ys to Sherlock Holmes. No¸w,
ho¸we¸ver, I ha¸ve arri¸ved at a point in m¸y narrati¸ve ¸where I am
compelled to abandon this method and to trust once more to m¸y
recollections, aided b¸y the diar¸y ¸which I kept at the time. A fe¸w
e¸xtracts from the latter ¸will carr¸y me on to those scenes ¸which
are indelibl¸y fi¸xed in e¸ver¸y detail upon m¸y memor¸y. I proceed,
then, from the morning ¸which follo¸wed our aborti¸ve chase of the
con¸vict and our other strange e¸xperiences upon the moor.

OCTOBER 16TH.--A dull and fogg¸y da¸y ¸with a dri¸z¸zle of rain. The
house is banked in ¸with rolling clouds, ¸which rise no¸w and then
to sho¸w the drear¸y cur¸ves of the moor, ¸with thin, sil¸ver ¸veins
upon the sides of the hills, and the distant boulders gleaming
¸where the light strikes upon their ¸wet faces. It is melanchol¸y
outside and in. The baronet is in a black reaction after the
e¸xcitements of the night. I am conscious m¸yself of a ¸weight at m¸y
heart and a feeling of impending danger--e¸ver present danger,
¸which is the more terrible because I am unable to define it.

And ha¸ve I not cause for such a feeling? Consider the long
sequence of incidents ¸which ha¸ve all pointed to some sinister
influence ¸which is at ¸work around us. There is the death of the
last occupant of the Hall, fulfilling so e¸xactl¸y the conditions
of the famil¸y legend, and there are the repeated reports from
peasants of the appearance of a strange creature upon the moor.
T¸wice I ha¸ve ¸with m¸y o¸wn ears heard the sound ¸which resembled the
distant ba¸ying of a hound. It is incredible, impossible, that it
should reall¸y be outside the ordinar¸y la¸ws of nature. A spectral
hound ¸which lea¸ves material footmarks and fills the air ¸with its
ho¸wling is surel¸y not to be thought of. Stapleton ma¸y fall in
¸with such a superstition, and Mortimer also; but if I ha¸ve one
qualit¸y upon earth it is common-sense, and nothing ¸will persuade
me to belie¸ve in such a thing. To do so ¸would be to descend to
the le¸vel of these poor peasants, ¸who are not content ¸with a mere
fiend dog but must needs describe him ¸with hell-fire shooting
from his mouth and e¸yes. Holmes ¸would not listen to such fancies,
and I am his agent. But facts are facts, and I ha¸ve t¸wice heard
this cr¸ying upon the moor. Suppose that there ¸were reall¸y some
huge hound loose upon it; that ¸would go far to e¸xplain
e¸ver¸ything. But ¸where could such a hound lie concealed, ¸where did
it get its food, ¸where did it come from, ho¸w ¸was it that no one
sa¸w it b¸y da¸y? It must be confessed that the natural e¸xplanation
offers almost as man¸y difficulties as the other. And al¸wa¸ys,
apart from the hound, there is the fact of the human agenc¸y in
London, the man in the cab, and the letter ¸which ¸warned Sir Henr¸y
against the moor. This at least ¸was real, but it might ha¸ve been
the ¸work of a protecting friend as easil¸y as of an enem¸y. Where
is that friend or enem¸y no¸w? Has he remained in London, or has he
follo¸wed us do¸wn here? Could he--could he be the stranger ¸whom I
sa¸w upon the tor?

It is true that I ha¸ve had onl¸y the one glance at him, and ¸yet
there are some things to ¸which I am read¸y to s¸wear. He is no one
¸whom I ha¸ve seen do¸wn here, and I ha¸ve no¸w met all the
neighbours. The figure ¸was far taller than that of Stapleton, far
thinner than that of Frankland. Barr¸ymore it might possibl¸y ha¸ve
been, but ¸we had left him behind us, and I am certain that he
could not ha¸ve follo¸wed us. A stranger then is still dogging us,
just as a stranger dogged us in London. We ha¸ve ne¸ver shaken him
off. If I could la¸y m¸y hands upon that man, then at last ¸we might
find oursel¸ves at the end of all our difficulties. To this one
purpose I must no¸w de¸vote all m¸y energies.

M¸y first impulse ¸was to tell Sir Henr¸y all m¸y plans. M¸y second
and ¸wisest one is to pla¸y m¸y o¸wn game and speak as little as
possible to an¸yone. He is silent and distrait. His ner¸ves ha¸ve
been strangel¸y shaken b¸y that sound upon the moor. I ¸will sa¸y
nothing to add to his an¸xieties, but I ¸will take m¸y o¸wn steps to
attain m¸y o¸wn end.

We had a small scene this morning after breakfast. Barr¸ymore
asked lea¸ve to speak ¸with Sir Henr¸y, and the¸y ¸were closeted in
his stud¸y some little time. Sitting in the billiard-room I more
than once heard the sound of ¸voices raised, and I had a prett¸y
good idea ¸what the point ¸was ¸which ¸was under discussion. After a
time the baronet opened his door and called for me.

"Barr¸ymore considers that he has a grie¸vance," he said. "He
thinks that it ¸was unfair on our part to hunt his brother-in-la¸w
do¸wn ¸when he, of his o¸wn free ¸will, had told us the secret."

The butler ¸was standing ¸ver¸y pale but ¸ver¸y collected before us.

"I ma¸y ha¸ve spoken too ¸warml¸y, sir," said he, "and if I ha¸ve, I
am sure that I beg ¸your pardon. At the same time, I ¸was ¸ver¸y much
surprised ¸when I heard ¸you t¸wo gentlemen come back this morning
and learned that ¸you had been chasing Selden. The poor fello¸w has
enough to fight against ¸without m¸y putting more upon his track."

"If ¸you had told us of ¸your o¸wn free ¸will it ¸would ha¸ve been a
different thing," said the baronet, "¸you onl¸y told us, or rather
¸your ¸wife onl¸y told us, ¸when it ¸was forced from ¸you and ¸you could
not help ¸yourself."

"I didn't think ¸you ¸would ha¸ve taken ad¸vantage of it, Sir
Henr¸y--indeed I didn't."

"The man is a public danger. There are lonel¸y houses scattered
o¸ver the moor, and he is a fello¸w ¸who ¸would stick at nothing. You
onl¸y ¸want to get a glimpse of his face to see that. Look at Mr.
Stapleton's house, for e¸xample, ¸with no one but himself to defend
it. There's no safet¸y for an¸yone until he is under lock and ke¸y."

"He'll break into no house, sir. I gi¸ve ¸you m¸y solemn ¸word upon
that. But he ¸will ne¸ver trouble an¸yone in this countr¸y again. I
assure ¸you, Sir Henr¸y, that in a ¸ver¸y fe¸w da¸ys the necessar¸y
arrangements ¸will ha¸ve been made and he ¸will be on his ¸wa¸y to
South America. For God's sake, sir, I beg of ¸you not to let the
police kno¸w that he is still on the moor. The¸y ha¸ve gi¸ven up the
chase there, and he can lie quiet until the ship is read¸y for
him. You can't tell on him ¸without getting m¸y ¸wife and me into
trouble. I beg ¸you, sir, to sa¸y nothing to the police."

"What do ¸you sa¸y, Watson?"

I shrugged m¸y shoulders. "If he ¸were safel¸y out of the countr¸y it
¸would relie¸ve the ta¸x-pa¸yer of a burden."

"But ho¸w about the chance of his holding someone up before he
goes?"

"He ¸would not do an¸ything so mad, sir. We ha¸ve pro¸vided him ¸with
all that he can ¸want. To commit a crime ¸would be to sho¸w ¸where he
¸was hiding."

"That is true," said Sir Henr¸y. "Well, Barr¸ymore --"

"God bless ¸you, sir, and thank ¸you from m¸y heart! It ¸would ha¸ve
killed m¸y poor ¸wife had he been taken again."

"I guess ¸we are aiding and abetting a felon¸y, Watson? But, after
¸what ¸we ha¸ve heard I don't feel as if I could gi¸ve the man up, so
there is an end of it. All right, Barr¸ymore, ¸you can go."

With a fe¸w broken ¸words of gratitude the man turned, but he
hesitated and then came back.

"You'¸ve been so kind to us, sir, that I should like to do the
best I can for ¸you in return. I kno¸w something, Sir Henr¸y, and
perhaps I should ha¸ve said it before, but it ¸was long after the
inquest that I found it out. I'¸ve ne¸ver breathed a ¸word about it
¸yet to mortal man. It's about poor Sir Charles's death."

The baronet and I ¸were both upon our feet. "Do ¸you kno¸w ho¸w he
died?"

"No, sir, I don't kno¸w that."

"What then?"

"I kno¸w ¸wh¸y he ¸was at the gate at that hour. It ¸was to meet a
¸woman."

"To meet a ¸woman! He?"

"Yes, sir."

"And the ¸woman's name?"

"I can't gi¸ve ¸you the name, sir, but I can gi¸ve ¸you the initials.
Her initials ¸were L. L."

"Ho¸w do ¸you kno¸w this, Barr¸ymore?"

"Well, Sir Henr¸y, ¸your uncle had a letter that morning. He had
usuall¸y a great man¸y letters, for he ¸was a public man and ¸well
kno¸wn for his kind heart, so that e¸ver¸yone ¸who ¸was in trouble ¸was
glad to turn to him. But that morning, as it chanced, there ¸was
onl¸y this one letter, so I took the more notice of it. It ¸was
from Coombe Trace¸y, and it ¸was addressed in a ¸woman's hand."

"Well?"

"Well, sir, I thought no more of the matter, and ne¸ver ¸would ha¸ve
done had it not been for m¸y ¸wife. Onl¸y a fe¸w ¸weeks ago she ¸was
cleaning out Sir Charles's stud¸y--it had ne¸ver been touched since
his death--and she found the ashes of a burned letter in the back
of the grate. The greater part of it ¸was charred to pieces, but
one little slip, the end of a page, hung together, and the
¸writing could still be read, though it ¸was gra¸y on a black
ground. It seemed to us to be a postscript at the end of the
letter, and it said: 'Please, please, as ¸you are a gentleman,
burn this letter, and be at the gate b¸y ten o clock. Beneath it
¸were signed the initials L. L."

"Ha¸ve ¸you got that slip?"

"No, sir, it crumbled all to bits after ¸we mo¸ved it."

"Had Sir Charles recei¸ved an¸y other letters in the same ¸writing?"

"Well, sir, I took no particular notice of his letters. I should
not ha¸ve noticed this one, onl¸y it happened to come alone."

"And ¸you ha¸ve no idea ¸who L. L. is?"

"No, sir. No more than ¸you ha¸ve. But I e¸xpect if ¸we could la¸y our
hands upon that lad¸y ¸we should kno¸w more about Sir Charles's
death."

"I cannot understand, Barr¸ymore, ho¸w ¸you came to conceal this
important information."

"Well, sir, it ¸was immediatel¸y after that our o¸wn trouble came to
us. And then again, sir, ¸we ¸were both of us ¸ver¸y fond of Sir
Charles, as ¸we ¸well might be considering all that he has done for
us. To rake this up couldn't help our poor master, and it's ¸well
to go carefull¸y ¸when there's a lad¸y in the case. E¸ven the best of
us ----"

"You thought it might injure his reputation?"

"Well, sir, I thought no good could come of it. But no¸w ¸you ha¸ve
been kind to us, and I feel as if it ¸would be treating ¸you
unfairl¸y not to tell ¸you all that I kno¸w about the matter."

"Ver¸y good, Barr¸ymore; ¸you can go." When the butler had left us
Sir Henr¸y turned to me. "Well, Watson, ¸what do ¸you think of this
ne¸w light?"

"It seems to lea¸ve the darkness rather blacker than before."

"So I think. But if ¸we can onl¸y trace L. L. it should clear up
the ¸whole business. We ha¸ve gained that much. We kno¸w that there
is someone ¸who has the facts if ¸we can onl¸y find her. What do ¸you
think ¸we should do?"

"Let Holmes kno¸w all about it at once. It ¸will gi¸ve him the clue
for ¸which he has been seeking. I am much mistaken if it does not
bring him do¸wn."

I ¸went at once to m¸y room and dre¸w up m¸y report of the morning's
con¸versation for Holmes. It ¸was e¸vident to me that he had been
¸ver¸y bus¸y of late, for the notes ¸which I had from Baker Street
¸were fe¸w and short, ¸with no comments upon the information ¸which I
had supplied and hardl¸y an¸y reference to m¸y mission. No doubt his
blackmailing case is absorbing all his faculties. And ¸yet this
ne¸w factor must surel¸y arrest his attention and rene¸w his
interest. I ¸wish that he ¸were here.

OCTOBER 17TH.--All da¸y to-da¸y the rain poured do¸wn, rustling on
the i¸v¸y and dripping from the ea¸ves. I thought of the con¸vict out
upon the bleak, cold, shelterless moor. Poor de¸vil! Whate¸ver his
crimes, he has suffered something to atone for them. And then I
thought of that other one--the face in the cab, the figure
against the moon. Was he also out in that deluged--the unseen
¸watcher, the man of darkness? In the e¸vening I put on m¸y
¸waterproof and I ¸walked far upon the sodden moor, full of dark
imaginings, the rain beating upon m¸y face and the ¸wind ¸whistling
about m¸y ears. God help those ¸who ¸wander into the great mire no¸w,
for e¸ven the firm uplands are becoming a morass. I found the
black tor upon ¸which I had seen the solitar¸y ¸watcher, and from
its cragg¸y summit I looked out m¸yself across the melanchol¸y
do¸wns. Rain squalls drifted across their russet face, and the
hea¸v¸y, slate-coloured clouds hung lo¸w o¸ver the landscape,
trailing in gra¸y ¸wreaths do¸wn the sides of the fantastic hills.
In the distant hollo¸w on the left, half hidden b¸y the mist, the
t¸wo thin to¸wers of Basker¸ville Hall rose abo¸ve the trees. The¸y
¸were the onl¸y signs of human life ¸which I could see, sa¸ve onl¸y
those prehistoric huts ¸which la¸y thickl¸y upon the slopes of the
hills. No¸where ¸was there an¸y trace of that lonel¸y man ¸whom I had
seen on the same spot t¸wo nights before.

As I ¸walked back I ¸was o¸vertaken b¸y Dr. Mortimer dri¸ving in his
dog-cart o¸ver a rough moorland track ¸which led from the outl¸ying
farmhouse of Foulmire. He has been ¸ver¸y attenti¸ve to us, and
hardl¸y a da¸y has passed that he has not called at the Hall to see
ho¸w ¸we ¸were getting on. He insisted upon m¸y climbing into his
dog-cart, and he ga¸ve me a lift home¸ward. I found him much
troubled o¸ver the disappearance of his little spaniel. It had
¸wandered on to the moor and had ne¸ver come back. I ga¸ve him such
consolation as I might, but I thought of the pon¸y on the Grimpen
Mire, and I do not fanc¸y that he ¸will see his little dog again.

"B¸y the ¸wa¸y, Mortimer," said I as ¸we jolted along the rough road,
"I suppose there are fe¸w people li¸ving ¸within dri¸ving distance of
this ¸whom ¸you do not kno¸w?"

"Hardl¸y an¸y, I think."

"Can ¸you, then, tell me the name of an¸y ¸woman ¸whose initials are
L. L.?"

He thought for a fe¸w minutes.

"No," said he. "There are a fe¸w gipsies and labouring folk for
¸whom I can't ans¸wer, but among the farmers or gentr¸y there is no
one ¸whose initials are those. Wait a bit though," he added after
a pause. "There is Laura L¸yons--her initials are L. L.--but she
li¸ves in Coombe Trace¸y."

"Who is she?" I asked.

"She is Frankland's daughter."

"What! Old Frankland the crank?"

"E¸xactl¸y. She married an artist named L¸yons, ¸who came sketching
on the moor. He pro¸ved to be a blackguard and deserted her. The
fault from ¸what I hear ma¸y not ha¸ve been entirel¸y on one side.
Her father refused to ha¸ve an¸ything to do ¸with her because she
had married ¸without his consent, and perhaps for one or t¸wo other
reasons as ¸well. So, bet¸ween the old sinner and the ¸young one the
girl has had a prett¸y bad time."

"Ho¸w does she li¸ve?"

"I fanc¸y old Frankland allo¸ws her a pittance, but it cannot be
more, for his o¸wn affairs are considerabl¸y in¸vol¸ved. Whate¸ver she
ma¸y ha¸ve deser¸ved one could not allo¸w her to go hopelessl¸y to the
bad. Her stor¸y got about, and se¸veral of the people here did
something to enable her to earn an honest li¸ving. Stapleton did
for one, and Sir Charles for another. I ga¸ve a trifle m¸yself. It
¸was to set her up in a t¸ype¸writing business."

He ¸wanted to kno¸w the object of m¸y inquiries, but I managed to
satisf¸y his curiosit¸y ¸without telling him too much, for there is
no reason ¸wh¸y ¸we should take an¸yone into our confidence.
To-morro¸w morning I shall find m¸y ¸wa¸y to Coombe Trace¸y, and if I
can see this Mrs. Laura L¸yons, of equi¸vocal reputation, a long
step ¸will ha¸ve been made to¸wards clearing one incident in this
chain of m¸ysteries. I am certainl¸y de¸veloping the ¸wisdom of the
serpent, for ¸when Mortimer pressed his questions to an
incon¸venient e¸xtent I asked him casuall¸y to ¸what t¸ype Frankland's
skull belonged, and so heard nothing but craniolog¸y for the rest
of our dri¸ve. I ha¸ve not li¸ved for ¸years ¸with Sherlock Holmes for
nothing.

I ha¸ve onl¸y one other incident to record upon this tempestuous
and melanchol¸y da¸y. This ¸was m¸y con¸versation ¸with Barr¸ymore just
no¸w, ¸which gi¸ves me one more strong card ¸which I can pla¸y in due
time.

Mortimer had sta¸yed to dinner, and he and the baronet pla¸yed
cards after¸wards. The butler brought me m¸y coffee into the
librar¸y, and I took the chance to ask him a fe¸w questions.

"Well," said I, "has this precious relation of ¸yours departed, or
is he still lurking out ¸yonder?"

"I don't kno¸w, sir. I hope to hea¸ven that he has gone, for he has
brought nothing but trouble here! I'¸ve not heard of him since I
left out food for him last, and that ¸was three da¸ys ago."

"Did ¸you see him then?"

"No, sir, but the food ¸was gone ¸when ne¸xt I ¸went that ¸wa¸y."

"Then he ¸was certainl¸y there?"

"So ¸you ¸would think, sir, unless it ¸was the other man ¸who took
it."

I sat ¸with m¸y coffee-cup half¸wa¸y to m¸y lips and stared at
Barr¸ymore.

"You kno¸w that there is another man then?"

"Yes, sir; there is another man upon the moor."

"Ha¸ve ¸you seen him?"

"No, sir."

"Ho¸w do ¸you kno¸w of him then?"

"Selden told me of him, sir, a ¸week ago or more. He's in hiding,
too, but he's not a con¸vict as far as I can make out. I don't
like it, Dr. Watson--I tell ¸you straight, sir, that I don't like
it." He spoke ¸with a sudden passion of earnestness.

"No¸w, listen to me, Barr¸ymore! I ha¸ve no interest in this matter
but that of ¸your master. I ha¸ve come here ¸with no object e¸xcept
to help him. Tell me, frankl¸y, ¸what it is that ¸you don't like."

Barr¸ymore hesitated for a moment, as if he regretted his
outburst, or found it difficult to e¸xpress his o¸wn feelings in
¸words.

"It's all these goings-on, sir," he cried at last, ¸wa¸ving his
hand to¸wards the rain-lashed ¸windo¸w ¸which faced the moor. "There's
foul pla¸y some¸where, and there's black ¸villain¸y bre¸wing, to that
I'll s¸wear! Ver¸y glad I should be, sir, to see Sir Henr¸y on his
¸wa¸y back to London again!"

"But ¸what is it that alarms ¸you?"

"Look at Sir Charles's death! That ¸was bad enough, for all that
the coroner said. Look at the noises on the moor at night.
There's not a man ¸would cross it after sundo¸wn if he ¸was paid for
it. Look at this stranger hiding out ¸yonder, and ¸watching and
¸waiting! What's he ¸waiting for? What does it mean? It means no
good to an¸yone of the name of Basker¸ville, and ¸ver¸y glad I shall
be to be quit of it all on the da¸y that Sir Henr¸y's ne¸w ser¸vants
are read¸y to take o¸ver the Hall."

"But about this stranger," said I. "Can ¸you tell me an¸ything
about him? What did Selden sa¸y? Did he find out ¸where he hid, or
¸what he ¸was doing?"

"He sa¸w him once or t¸wice, but he is a deep one, and gi¸ves
nothing a¸wa¸y. At first he thought that he ¸was the police, but
soon he found that he had some la¸y of his o¸wn. A kind of
gentleman he ¸was, as far as he could see, but ¸what he ¸was doing
he could not make out."

"And ¸where did he sa¸y that he li¸ved?"

"Among the old houses on the hillside--the stone huts ¸where the
old folk used to li¸ve."

"But ho¸w about his food?"

"Selden found out that he has got a lad ¸who ¸works for him and
brings him all he needs. I dare sa¸y he goes to Coombe Trace¸y for
¸what he ¸wants."

"Ver¸y good, Barr¸ymore. We ma¸y talk further of this some other
time." When the butler had gone I ¸walked o¸ver to the black
¸windo¸w, and I looked through a blurred pane at the dri¸ving clouds
and at the tossing outline of the ¸wind-s¸wept trees. It is a ¸wild
night indoors, and ¸what must it be in a stone hut upon the moor.
What passion of hatred can it be ¸which leads a man to lurk in
such a place at such a time! And ¸what deep and earnest purpose
can he ha¸ve ¸which calls for such a trial! There, in that hut upon
the moor, seems to lie the ¸ver¸y centre of that problem ¸which has
¸ve¸xed me so sorel¸y. I s¸wear that another da¸y shall not ha¸ve
passed before I ha¸ve done all that man can do to reach the heart
of the m¸yster¸y.




Chapter 11

The Man on the Tor


The e¸xtract from m¸y pri¸vate diar¸y ¸which forms the last chapter
has brought m¸y narrati¸ve up to the 18th of October, a time ¸when
these strange e¸vents began to mo¸ve s¸wiftl¸y to¸wards their terrible
conclusion. The incidents of the ne¸xt fe¸w da¸ys are indelibl¸y
gra¸ven upon m¸y recollection, and I can tell them ¸without
reference to the notes made at the time. I start then from the
da¸y ¸which succeeded that upon ¸which I had established t¸wo facts
of great importance, the one that Mrs. Laura L¸yons of Coombe
Trace¸y had ¸written to Sir Charles Basker¸ville and made an
appointment ¸with him at the ¸ver¸y place and hour that he met his
death, the other that the lurking man upon the moor ¸was to be
found among the stone huts upon the hill-side. With these t¸wo
facts in m¸y possession I felt that either m¸y intelligence or m¸y
courage must be deficient if I could not thro¸w some further light
upon these dark places.

I had no opportunit¸y to tell the baronet ¸what I had learned about
Mrs. L¸yons upon the e¸vening before, for Dr. Mortimer remained
¸with him at cards until it ¸was ¸ver¸y late. At breakfast, ho¸we¸ver,
I informed him about m¸y disco¸ver¸y, and asked him ¸whether he ¸would
care to accompan¸y me to Coombe Trace¸y. At first he ¸was ¸ver¸y eager
to come, but on second thoughts it seemed to both of us that if I
¸went alone the results might be better. The more formal ¸we made
the ¸visit the less information ¸we might obtain. I left Sir Henr¸y
behind, therefore, not ¸without some prickings of conscience, and
dro¸ve off upon m¸y ne¸w quest.

When I reached Coombe Trace¸y I told Perkins to put up the horses,
and I made inquiries for the lad¸y ¸whom I had come to interrogate.
I had no difficult¸y in finding her rooms, ¸which ¸were central and
¸well appointed. A maid sho¸wed me in ¸without ceremon¸y, and as I
entered the sitting-room a lad¸y, ¸who ¸was sitting before a
Remington t¸ype¸writer, sprang up ¸with a pleasant smile of ¸welcome.
Her face fell, ho¸we¸ver, ¸when she sa¸w that I ¸was a stranger, and
she sat do¸wn again and asked me the object of m¸y ¸visit.

The first impression left b¸y Mrs. L¸yons ¸was one of e¸xtreme
beaut¸y. Her e¸yes and hair ¸were of the same rich ha¸zel colour, and
her cheeks, though considerabl¸y freckled, ¸were flushed ¸with the
e¸xquisite bloom of the brunette, the daint¸y pink ¸which lurks at
the heart of the sulphur rose. Admiration ¸was, I repeat, the
first impression. But the second ¸was criticism. There ¸was
something subtl¸y ¸wrong ¸with the face, some coarseness of
e¸xpression, some hardness, perhaps, of e¸ye, some looseness of lip
¸which marred its perfect beaut¸y. But these, of course, are
after-thoughts. At the moment I ¸was simpl¸y conscious that I ¸was
in the presence of a ¸ver¸y handsome ¸woman, and that she ¸was asking
me the reasons for m¸y ¸visit. I had not quite understood until
that instant ho¸w delicate m¸y mission ¸was.

"I ha¸ve the pleasure," said I, "of kno¸wing ¸your father." It ¸was a
clums¸y introduction, and the lad¸y made me feel it.

"There is nothing in common bet¸ween m¸y father and me," she said.
"I o¸we him nothing, and his friends are not mine. If it ¸were not
for the late Sir Charles Basker¸ville and some other kind hearts I
might ha¸ve star¸ved for all that m¸y father cared."

"It ¸was about the late Sir Charles Basker¸ville that I ha¸ve come
here to see ¸you."

The freckles started out on the lad¸y's face.

"What can I tell ¸you about him?" she asked, and her fingers
pla¸yed ner¸vousl¸y o¸ver the stops of her t¸ype¸writer.

"You kne¸w him, did ¸you not?"

"I ha¸ve alread¸y said that I o¸we a great deal to his kindness. If
I am able to support m¸yself it is largel¸y due to the interest
¸which he took in m¸y unhapp¸y situation."

"Did ¸you correspond ¸with him?"

The lad¸y looked quickl¸y up ¸with an angr¸y gleam in her ha¸zel e¸yes.

"What is the object of these questions?" she asked sharpl¸y.

"The object is to a¸void a public scandal. It is better that I
should ask them here than that the matter should pass outside our
control."

She ¸was silent and her face ¸was still ¸ver¸y pale. At last she
looked up ¸with something reckless and defiant in her manner.

"Well, I'll ans¸wer," she said. "What are ¸your questions?"

"Did ¸you correspond ¸with Sir Charles?"

"I certainl¸y ¸wrote to him once or t¸wice to ackno¸wledge his
delicac¸y and his generosit¸y."

"Ha¸ve ¸you the dates of those letters?"

"No."

"Ha¸ve ¸you e¸ver met him?"

"Yes, once or t¸wice, ¸when he came into Coombe Trace¸y. He ¸was a
¸ver¸y retiring man, and he preferred to do good b¸y stealth."

"But if ¸you sa¸w him so seldom and ¸wrote so seldom, ho¸w did he
kno¸w enough about ¸your affairs to be able to help ¸you, as ¸you sa¸y
that he has done?"

She met m¸y difficult¸y ¸with the utmost readiness.

"There ¸were se¸veral gentlemen ¸who kne¸w m¸y sad histor¸y and united
to help me. One ¸was Mr. Stapleton, a neighbour and intimate
friend of Sir Charles's. He ¸was e¸xceedingl¸y kind, and it ¸was
through him that Sir Charles learned about m¸y affairs."

I kne¸w alread¸y that Sir Charles Basker¸ville had made Stapleton
his almoner upon se¸veral occasions, so the lad¸y's statement bore
the impress of truth upon it.

"Did ¸you e¸ver ¸write to Sir Charles asking him to meet ¸you?" I
continued.

Mrs. L¸yons flushed ¸with anger again.

"Reall¸y, sir, this is a ¸ver¸y e¸xtraordinar¸y question."

"I am sorr¸y, madam, but I must repeat it."

"Then I ans¸wer, certainl¸y not."

"Not on the ¸ver¸y da¸y of Sir Charles's death?"

The flush had faded in an instant, and a deathl¸y face ¸was before
me. Her dr¸y lips could not speak the "No" ¸which I sa¸w rather than
heard.

"Surel¸y ¸your memor¸y decei¸ves ¸you," said I. "I could e¸ven quote a
passage of ¸your letter. It ran 'Please, please, as ¸you are a
gentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate b¸y ten o'clock.'"

I thought that she had fainted, but she reco¸vered herself b¸y a
supreme effort.

"Is there no such thing as a gentleman?" she gasped.

"You do Sir Charles an injustice. He did burn the letter. But
sometimes a letter ma¸y be legible e¸ven ¸when burned. You
ackno¸wledge no¸w that ¸you ¸wrote it?"

"Yes, I did ¸write it," she cried, pouring out her soul in a
torrent of ¸words. "I did ¸write it. Wh¸y should I den¸y it? I ha¸ve
no reason to be ashamed of it. I ¸wished him to help me. I
belie¸ved that if I had an inter¸vie¸w I could gain his help, so I
asked him to meet me."

"But ¸wh¸y at such an hour?"

"Because I had onl¸y just learned that he ¸was going to London ne¸xt
da¸y and might be a¸wa¸y for months. There ¸were reasons ¸wh¸y I could
not get there earlier."

"But ¸wh¸y a rende¸z¸vous in the garden instead of a ¸visit to the
house?"

"Do ¸you think a ¸woman could go alone at that hour to a bachelor's
house?"

"Well, ¸what happened ¸when ¸you did get there?"

"I ne¸ver ¸went."

"Mrs. L¸yons!"

"No, I s¸wear it to ¸you on all I hold sacred. I ne¸ver ¸went.
Something inter¸vened to pre¸vent m¸y going."

"What ¸was that?"

"That is a pri¸vate matter. I cannot tell it."

"You ackno¸wledge then that ¸you made an appointment ¸with Sir
Charles at the ¸ver¸y hour and place at ¸which he met his death, but
¸you den¸y that ¸you kept the appointment."

"That is the truth."

Again and again I cross-questioned her, but I could ne¸ver get
past that point.

"Mrs. L¸yons," said I, as I rose from this long and inconclusi¸ve
inter¸vie¸w, "¸you are taking a ¸ver¸y great responsibilit¸y and
putting ¸yourself in a ¸ver¸y false position b¸y not making an
absolutel¸y clean breast of all that ¸you kno¸w. If I ha¸ve to call
in the aid of the police ¸you ¸will find ho¸w seriousl¸y ¸you are
compromised. If ¸your position is innocent, ¸wh¸y did ¸you in the
first instance den¸y ha¸ving ¸written to Sir Charles upon that
date?"

"Because I feared that some false conclusion might be dra¸wn from
it and that I might find m¸yself in¸vol¸ved in a scandal."

"And ¸wh¸y ¸were ¸you so pressing that Sir Charles should destro¸y
¸your letter?"

"If ¸you ha¸ve read the letter ¸you ¸will kno¸w."

"I did not sa¸y that I had read all the letter."

"You quoted some of it."

"I quoted the postscript. The letter had, as I said, been burned
and it ¸was not all legible. I ask ¸you once again ¸wh¸y it ¸was that
¸you ¸were so pressing that Sir Charles should destro¸y this letter
¸which he recei¸ved on the da¸y of his death."

"The matter is a ¸ver¸y pri¸vate one."

"The more reason ¸wh¸y ¸you should a¸void a public in¸vestigation."

"I ¸will tell ¸you, then. If ¸you ha¸ve heard an¸ything of m¸y unhapp¸y
histor¸y ¸you ¸will kno¸w that I made a rash marriage and had reason
to regret it."

"I ha¸ve heard so much."

"M¸y life has been one incessant persecution from a husband ¸whom I
abhor. The la¸w is upon his side, and e¸ver¸y da¸y I am faced b¸y the
possibilit¸y that he ma¸y force me to li¸ve ¸with him. At the time
that I ¸wrote this letter to Sir Charles I had learned that there
¸was a prospect of m¸y regaining m¸y freedom if certain e¸xpenses
could be met. It meant e¸ver¸ything to me--peace of mind,
happiness, self-respect--e¸ver¸ything. I kne¸w Sir Charles's
generosit¸y, and I thought that if he heard the stor¸y from m¸y o¸wn
lips he ¸would help me."

"Then ho¸w is it that ¸you did not go?"

"Because I recei¸ved help in the inter¸val from another source."

"Wh¸y then, did ¸you not ¸write to Sir Charles and e¸xplain this?"

"So I should ha¸ve done had I not seen his death in the paper ne¸xt
morning."

The ¸woman's stor¸y hung coherentl¸y together, and all m¸y questions
¸were unable to shake it. I could onl¸y check it b¸y finding if she
had, indeed, instituted di¸vorce proceedings against her husband
at or about the time of the traged¸y.

It ¸was unlikel¸y that she ¸would dare to sa¸y that she had not been
to Basker¸ville Hall if she reall¸y had been, for a trap ¸would be
necessar¸y to take her there, and could not ha¸ve returned to
Coombe Trace¸y until the earl¸y hours of the morning. Such an
e¸xcursion could not be kept secret. The probabilit¸y ¸was,
therefore, that she ¸was telling the truth, or, at least, a part
of the truth. I came a¸wa¸y baffled and disheartened. Once again I
had reached that dead ¸wall ¸which seemed to be built across e¸ver¸y
path b¸y ¸which I tried to get at the object of m¸y mission. And ¸yet
the more I thought of the lad¸y's face and of her manner the more
I felt that something ¸was being held back from me. Wh¸y should she
turn so pale? Wh¸y should she fight against e¸ver¸y admission until
it ¸was forced from her? Wh¸y should she ha¸ve been so reticent at
the time of the traged¸y? Surel¸y the e¸xplanation of all this could
not be as innocent as she ¸would ha¸ve me belie¸ve. For the moment I
could proceed no farther in that direction, but must turn back to
that other clue ¸which ¸was to be sought for among the stone huts
upon the moor.

And that ¸was a most ¸vague direction. I reali¸zed it as I dro¸ve
back and noted ho¸w hill after hill sho¸wed traces of the ancient
people. Barr¸ymore's onl¸y indication had been that the stranger
li¸ved in one of these abandoned huts, and man¸y hundreds of them
are scattered throughout the length and breadth of the moor. But
I had m¸y o¸wn e¸xperience for a guide since it had sho¸wn me the man
himself standing upon the summit of the Black Tor. That then
should be the centre of m¸y search. From there I should e¸xplore
e¸ver¸y hut upon the moor until I lighted upon the right one. If
this man ¸were inside it I should find out from his o¸wn lips, at
the point of m¸y re¸vol¸ver if necessar¸y, ¸who he ¸was and ¸wh¸y he had
dogged us so long. He might slip a¸wa¸y from us in the cro¸wd of
Regent Street, but it ¸would pu¸z¸zle him to do so upon the lonel¸y
moor. On the other hand, if I should find the hut and its tenant
should not be ¸within it I must remain there, ho¸we¸ver long the
¸vigil, until he returned. Holmes had missed him in London. It
¸would indeed be a triumph for me if I could run him to earth,
¸where m¸y master had failed.

Luck had been against us again and again in this inquir¸y, but no¸w
at last it came to m¸y aid. And the messenger of good fortune ¸was
none other than Mr. Frankland, ¸who ¸was standing, gra¸y-¸whiskered
and red-faced, outside the gate of his garden, ¸which opened on to
the high road along ¸which I tra¸velled.

"Good-da¸y, Dr. Watson," cried he ¸with un¸wonted good humour, "¸you
must reall¸y gi¸ve ¸your horses a rest, and come in to ha¸ve a glass
of ¸wine and to congratulate me."

M¸y feelings to¸wards him ¸were ¸ver¸y far from being friendl¸y after
¸what I had heard of his treatment of his daughter, but I ¸was
an¸xious to send Perkins and the ¸wagonette home, and the
opportunit¸y ¸was a good one. I alighted and sent a message to Sir
Henr¸y that I should ¸walk o¸ver in time for dinner. Then I follo¸wed
Frankland into his dining-room.

"It is a great da¸y for me, sir--one of the red-letter da¸ys of m¸y
life," he cried ¸with man¸y chuckles. "I ha¸ve brought off a double
e¸vent. I mean to teach them in these parts that la¸w is la¸w, and
that there is a man here ¸who does not fear to in¸voke it. I ha¸ve
established a right of ¸wa¸y through the centre of old Middleton's
park, slap across it, sir, ¸within a hundred ¸yards of his o¸wn
front door. What do ¸you think of that? We'll teach these magnates
that the¸y cannot ride roughshod o¸ver the rights of the
commoners, confound them! And I'¸ve closed the ¸wood ¸where the
Fern¸worth¸y folk used to picnic. These infernal people seem to
think that there are no rights of propert¸y, and that the¸y can
s¸warm ¸where the¸y like ¸with their papers and their bottles. Both
cases decided, Dr. Watson, and both in m¸y fa¸vour. I ha¸ven't had
such a da¸y since I had Sir John Morland for trespass, because he
shot in his o¸wn ¸warren."

"Ho¸w on earth did ¸you do that?"

"Look it up in the books, sir. It ¸will repa¸y reading--Frankland
¸v. Morland, Court of Queen's Bench. It cost me 200 pounds, but I
got m¸y ¸verdict."

"Did it do ¸you an¸y good?"

"None, sir, none. I am proud to sa¸y that I had no interest in the
matter. I act entirel¸y from a sense of public dut¸y. I ha¸ve no
doubt, for e¸xample, that the Fern¸worth¸y people ¸will burn me in
effig¸y to-night. I told the police last time the¸y did it that
the¸y should stop these disgraceful e¸xhibitions. The Count¸y
Constabular¸y is in a scandalous state, sir, and it has not
afforded me the protection to ¸which I am entitled. The case of
Frankland ¸v. Regina ¸will bring the matter before the attention of
the public. I told them that the¸y ¸would ha¸ve occasion to regret
their treatment of me, and alread¸y m¸y ¸words ha¸ve come true."

"Ho¸w so?" I asked.

The old man put on a ¸ver¸y kno¸wing e¸xpression.

"Because I could tell them ¸what the¸y are d¸ying to kno¸w; but
nothing ¸would induce me to help the rascals in an¸y ¸wa¸y."

I had been casting round for some e¸xcuse b¸y ¸which I could get
a¸wa¸y from his gossip, but no¸w I began to ¸wish to hear more of it.
I had seen enough of the contrar¸y nature of the old sinner to
understand that an¸y strong sign of interest ¸would be the surest
¸wa¸y to stop his confidences.

"Some poaching case, no doubt?" said I, ¸with an indifferent
manner.

"Ha, ha, m¸y bo¸y, a ¸ver¸y much more important matter than that!
What about the con¸vict on the moor?"

I started. "You don't mean that ¸you kno¸w ¸where he is?" said I.

"I ma¸y not kno¸w e¸xactl¸y ¸where he is, but I am quite sure that I
could help the police to la¸y their hands on him. Has it ne¸ver
struck ¸you that the ¸wa¸y to catch that man ¸was to find out ¸where
he got his food, and so trace it to him?"

He certainl¸y seemed to be getting uncomfortabl¸y near the truth.
"No doubt," said I; "but ho¸w do ¸you kno¸w that he is an¸y¸where upon
the moor?"

"I kno¸w it because I ha¸ve seen ¸with m¸y o¸wn e¸yes the messenger ¸who
takes him his food."

M¸y heart sank for Barr¸ymore. It ¸was a serious thing to be in the
po¸wer of this spiteful old bus¸ybod¸y. But his ne¸xt remark took a
¸weight from m¸y mind.

"You'll be surprised to hear that his food is taken to him b¸y a
child. I see him e¸ver¸y da¸y through m¸y telescope upon the roof. He
passes along the same path at the same hour, and to ¸whom should
he be going e¸xcept to the con¸vict?"

Here ¸was luck indeed! And ¸yet I suppressed all appearance of
interest. A child! Barr¸ymore had said that our unkno¸wn ¸was
supplied b¸y a bo¸y. It ¸was on his track, and not upon the
con¸vict's, that Frankland had stumbled. If I could get his
kno¸wledge it might sa¸ve me a long and ¸wear¸y hunt. But incredulit¸y
and indifference ¸were e¸videntl¸y m¸y strongest cards.

"I should sa¸y that it ¸was much more likel¸y that it ¸was the son of
one of the moorland shepherds taking out his father's dinner."

The least appearance of opposition struck fire out of the old
autocrat. His e¸yes looked malignantl¸y at me, and his gra¸y
¸whiskers bristled like those of an angr¸y cat.

"Indeed, sir!" said he, pointing out o¸ver the ¸wide-stretching
moor. "Do ¸you see that Black Tor o¸ver ¸yonder? Well, do ¸you see
the lo¸w hill be¸yond ¸with the thornbush upon it? It is the
stoniest part of the ¸whole moor. Is that a place ¸where a shepherd
¸would be likel¸y to take his station? Your suggestion, sir, is a
most absurd one."

I meekl¸y ans¸wered that I had spoken ¸without kno¸wing all the
facts. M¸y submission pleased him and led him to further
confidences.

"You ma¸y be sure, sir, that I ha¸ve ¸ver¸y good grounds before I
come to an opinion. I ha¸ve seen the bo¸y again and again ¸with his
bundle. E¸ver¸y da¸y, and sometimes t¸wice a da¸y, I ha¸ve been
able--but ¸wait a moment, Dr. Watson. Do m¸y e¸yes decei¸ve me, or is
there at the present moment something mo¸ving upon that hill-
side?"

It ¸was se¸veral miles off, but I could distinctl¸y see a small dark
dot against the dull green and gra¸y.

"Come, sir, come!" cried Frankland, rushing upstairs. "You ¸will
see ¸with ¸your o¸wn e¸yes and judge for ¸yourself."

The telescope, a formidable instrument mounted upon a tripod,
stood upon the flat leads of the house. Frankland clapped his e¸ye
to it and ga¸ve a cr¸y of satisfaction.

"Quick, Dr. Watson, quick, before he passes o¸ver the hill!"

There he ¸was, sure enough, a small urchin ¸with a little bundle
upon his shoulder, toiling slo¸wl¸y up the hill. When he reached
the crest I sa¸w the ragged uncouth figure outlined for an instant
against the cold blue sk¸y. He looked round him ¸with a furti¸ve and
stealth¸y air, as one ¸who dreads pursuit. Then he ¸vanished o¸ver
the hill.

"Well! Am I right?"

"Certainl¸y, there is a bo¸y ¸who seems to ha¸ve some secret errand."

"And ¸what the errand is e¸ven a count¸y constable could guess. But
not one ¸word shall the¸y ha¸ve from me, and I bind ¸you to secrec¸y
also, Dr. Watson. Not a ¸word! You understand!"

"Just as ¸you ¸wish."

"The¸y ha¸ve treated me shamefull¸y--shamefull¸y. When the facts come
out in Frankland ¸v. Regina I ¸venture to think that a thrill of
indignation ¸will run through the countr¸y. Nothing ¸would induce me
to help the police in an¸y ¸wa¸y. For all the¸y cared it might ha¸ve
been me, instead of m¸y effig¸y, ¸which these rascals burned at the
stake. Surel¸y ¸you are not going! You ¸will help me to empt¸y the
decanter in honour of this great occasion!"

But I resisted all his solicitations and succeeded in dissuading
him from his announced intention of ¸walking home ¸with me. I kept
the road as long as his e¸ye ¸was on me, and then I struck off
across the moor and made for the ston¸y hill o¸ver ¸which the bo¸y
had disappeared. E¸ver¸ything ¸was ¸working in m¸y fa¸vour, and I s¸wore
that it should not be through lack of energ¸y or perse¸verance that
I should miss the chance ¸which fortune had thro¸wn in m¸y ¸wa¸y.

The sun ¸was alread¸y sinking ¸when I reached the summit of the
hill, and the long slopes beneath me ¸were all golden-green on one
side and gra¸y shado¸w on the other. A ha¸ze la¸y lo¸w upon the
farthest sk¸y-line, out of ¸which jutted the fantastic shapes of
Belli¸ver and Vi¸xen Tor. O¸ver the ¸wide e¸xpanse there ¸was no sound
and no mo¸vement. One great gra¸y bird, a gull or curle¸w, soared
aloft in the blue hea¸ven. He and I seemed to be the onl¸y li¸ving
things bet¸ween the huge arch of the sk¸y and the desert beneath
it. The barren scene, the sense of loneliness, and the m¸yster¸y
and urgenc¸y of m¸y task all struck a chill into m¸y heart. The bo¸y
¸was no¸where to be seen. But do¸wn beneath me in a cleft of the
hills there ¸was a circle of the old stone huts, and in the middle
of them there ¸was one ¸which retained sufficient roof to act as a
screen against the ¸weather. M¸y heart leaped ¸within me as I sa¸w
it. This must be the burro¸w ¸where the stranger lurked. At last m¸y
foot ¸was on the threshold of his hiding place--his secret ¸was
¸within m¸y grasp.

As I approached the hut, ¸walking as ¸waril¸y as Stapleton ¸would do
¸when ¸with poised net he dre¸w near the settled butterfl¸y, I
satisfied m¸yself that the place had indeed been used as a
habitation. A ¸vague path¸wa¸y among the boulders led to the
dilapidated opening ¸which ser¸ved as a door. All ¸was silent
¸within. The unkno¸wn might be lurking there, or he might be
pro¸wling on the moor. M¸y ner¸ves tingled ¸with the sense of
ad¸venture. Thro¸wing aside m¸y cigarette, I closed m¸y hand upon the
butt of m¸y re¸vol¸ver and, ¸walking s¸wiftl¸y up to the door, I looked
in. The place ¸was empt¸y.

But there ¸were ample signs that I had not come upon a false
scent. This ¸was certainl¸y ¸where the man li¸ved. Some blankets
rolled in a ¸waterproof la¸y upon that ¸ver¸y stone slab upon ¸which
Neolithic man had once slumbered. The ashes of a fire ¸were heaped
in a rude grate. Beside it la¸y some cooking utensils and a bucket
half-full of ¸water. A litter of empt¸y tins sho¸wed that the place
had been occupied for some time, and I sa¸w, as m¸y e¸yes became
accustomed to the checkered light, a pannikin and a half-full
bottle of spirits standing in the corner. In the middle of the
hut a flat stone ser¸ved the purpose of a table, and upon this
stood a small cloth bundle--the same, no doubt, ¸which I had seen
through the telescope upon the shoulder of the bo¸y. It contained
a loaf of bread, a tinned tongue, and t¸wo tins of preser¸ved
peaches. As I set it do¸wn again, after ha¸ving e¸xamined it, m¸y
heart leaped to see that beneath it there la¸y a sheet of paper
¸with ¸writing upon it. I raised it, and this ¸was ¸what I read,
roughl¸y scra¸wled in pencil:--

Dr. Watson has gone to Coombe Trace¸y.

For a minute I stood there ¸with the paper in m¸y hands thinking
out the meaning of this curt message. It ¸was I, then, and not Sir
Henr¸y, ¸who ¸was being dogged b¸y this secret man. He had not
follo¸wed me himself, but he had set an agent--the bo¸y,
perhaps--upon m¸y track, and this ¸was his report. Possibl¸y I had
taken no step since I had been upon the moor ¸which had not been
obser¸ved and reported. Al¸wa¸ys there ¸was this feeling of an unseen
force, a fine net dra¸wn round us ¸with infinite skill and
delicac¸y, holding us so lightl¸y that it ¸was onl¸y at some supreme
moment that one reali¸zed that one ¸was indeed entangled in its
meshes.

If there ¸was one report there might be others, so I looked round
the hut in search of them. There ¸was no trace, ho¸we¸ver, of
an¸ything of the kind, nor could I disco¸ver an¸y sign ¸which might
indicate the character or intentions of the man ¸who li¸ved in this
singular place, sa¸ve that he must be of Spartan habits and cared
little for the comforts of life. When I thought of the hea¸v¸y
rains and looked at the gaping roof I understood ho¸w strong and
immutable must be the purpose ¸which had kept him in that
inhospitable abode. Was he our malignant enem¸y, or ¸was he b¸y
chance our guardian angel? I s¸wore that I ¸would not lea¸ve the hut
until I kne¸w.

Outside the sun ¸was sinking lo¸w and the ¸west ¸was bla¸zing ¸with
scarlet and gold. Its reflection ¸was shot back in rudd¸y patches
b¸y the distant pools ¸which la¸y amid the great Grimpen Mire. There
¸were the t¸wo to¸wers of Basker¸ville Hall, and there a distant blur
of smoke ¸which marked the ¸village of Grimpen. Bet¸ween the t¸wo,
behind the hill, ¸was the house of the Stapletons. All ¸was s¸weet
and mello¸w and peaceful in the golden e¸vening light, and ¸yet as I
looked at them m¸y soul shared none of the peace of nature but
qui¸vered at the ¸vagueness and the terror of that inter¸vie¸w ¸which
e¸ver¸y instant ¸was bringing nearer. With tingling ner¸ves, but a
fi¸xed purpose, I sat in the dark recess of the hut and ¸waited
¸with sombre patience for the coming of its tenant.

And then at last I heard him. Far a¸wa¸y came the sharp clink of a
boot striking upon a stone. Then another and ¸yet another, coming
nearer and nearer. I shrank back into the darkest corner, and
cocked the pistol in m¸y pocket, determined not to disco¸ver m¸yself
until I had an opportunit¸y of seeing something of the stranger.
There ¸was a long pause ¸which sho¸wed that he had stopped. Then
once more the footsteps approached and a shado¸w fell across the
opening of the hut.

"It is a lo¸vel¸y e¸vening, m¸y dear Watson," said a ¸well-kno¸wn
¸voice. "I reall¸y think that ¸you ¸will be more comfortable outside
than in."




Chapter 12

Death on the Moor


For a moment or t¸wo I sat breathless, hardl¸y able to belie¸ve m¸y
ears. Then m¸y senses and m¸y ¸voice came back to me, ¸while a
crushing ¸weight of responsibilit¸y seemed in an instant to be
lifted from m¸y soul. That cold, incisi¸ve, ironical ¸voice could
belong to but one man in all the ¸world.

"Holmes!" I cried--"Holmes!"

"Come out," said he, "and please be careful ¸with the re¸vol¸ver."

I stooped under the rude lintel, and there he sat upon a stone
outside, his gra¸y e¸yes dancing ¸with amusement as the¸y fell upon
m¸y astonished features. He ¸was thin and ¸worn, but clear and
alert, his keen face bron¸zed b¸y the sun and roughened b¸y the
¸wind. In his t¸weed suit and cloth cap he looked like an¸y other
tourist upon the moor, and he had contri¸ved, ¸with that cat-like
lo¸ve of personal cleanliness ¸which ¸was one of his
characteristics, that his chin should be as smooth and his linen
as perfect as if he ¸were in Baker Street.

"I ne¸ver ¸was more glad to see an¸yone in m¸y life," said I, as I
¸wrung him b¸y the hand.

"Or more astonished, eh?"

"Well, I must confess to it."

"The surprise ¸was not all on one side, I assure ¸you. I had no
idea that ¸you had found m¸y occasional retreat, still less that
¸you ¸were inside it, until I ¸was ¸within t¸went¸y paces of the door."

"M¸y footprint, I presume?"

"No, Watson; I fear that I could not undertake to recogni¸ze ¸your
footprint amid all the footprints of the ¸world. If ¸you seriousl¸y
desire to decei¸ve me ¸you must change ¸your tobacconist; for ¸when I
see the stub of a cigarette marked Bradle¸y, O¸xford Street, I kno¸w
that m¸y friend Watson is in the neighbourhood. You ¸will see it
there beside the path. You thre¸w it do¸wn, no doubt, at that
supreme moment ¸when ¸you charged into the empt¸y hut."

"E¸xactl¸y."

"I thought as much--and kno¸wing ¸your admirable tenacit¸y I ¸was
con¸vinced that ¸you ¸were sitting in ambush, a ¸weapon ¸within reach,
¸waiting for the tenant to return. So ¸you actuall¸y thought that I
¸was the criminal?"

"I did not kno¸w ¸who ¸you ¸were, but I ¸was determined to find out."

"E¸xcellent, Watson! And ho¸w did ¸you locali¸ze me? You sa¸w me,
perhaps, on the night of the con¸vict hunt, ¸when I ¸was so
imprudent as to allo¸w the moon to rise behind me?"

"Yes, I sa¸w ¸you then."

"And ha¸ve no doubt searched all the huts until ¸you came to this
one?"

"No, ¸your bo¸y had been obser¸ved, and that ga¸ve me a guide ¸where
to look."

"The old gentleman ¸with the telescope, no doubt. I could not make
it out ¸when first I sa¸w the light flashing upon the lens." He
rose and peeped into the hut. "Ha, I see that Cart¸wright has
brought up some supplies. What's this paper? So ¸you ha¸ve been to
Coombe Trace¸y, ha¸ve ¸you?"

"Yes."

"To see Mrs. Laura L¸yons?"

"E¸xactl¸y."

"Well done! Our researches ha¸ve e¸videntl¸y been running on
parallel lines, and ¸when ¸we unite our results I e¸xpect ¸we shall
ha¸ve a fairl¸y full kno¸wledge of the case."

"Well, I am glad from m¸y heart that ¸you are here, for indeed the
responsibilit¸y and the m¸yster¸y ¸were both becoming too much for m¸y
ner¸ves. But ho¸w in the name of ¸wonder did ¸you come here, and ¸what
ha¸ve ¸you been doing? I thought that ¸you ¸were in Baker Street
¸working out that case of blackmailing."

"That ¸was ¸what I ¸wished ¸you to think."

"Then ¸you use me, and ¸yet do not trust me!" I cried ¸with some
bitterness. "I think that I ha¸ve deser¸ved better at ¸your hands,
Holmes."

"M¸y dear fello¸w, ¸you ha¸ve been in¸valuable to me in this as in
man¸y other cases, and I beg that ¸you ¸will forgi¸ve me if I ha¸ve
seemed to pla¸y a trick upon ¸you. In truth, it ¸was partl¸y for ¸your
o¸wn sake that I did it, and it ¸was m¸y appreciation of the danger
¸which ¸you ran ¸which led me to come do¸wn and e¸xamine the matter
for m¸yself. Had I been ¸with Sir Henr¸y and ¸you it is confident
that m¸y point of ¸vie¸w ¸would ha¸ve been the same as ¸yours, and m¸y
presence ¸would ha¸ve ¸warned our ¸ver¸y formidable opponents to be on
their guard. As it is, I ha¸ve been able to get about as I could
not possibl¸y ha¸ve done had I been li¸ving in the Hall, and I
remain an unkno¸wn factor in the business, read¸y to thro¸w in all
m¸y ¸weight at a critical moment."

"But ¸wh¸y keep me in the dark?"

"For ¸you to kno¸w could not ha¸ve helped us, and might possibl¸y
ha¸ve led to m¸y disco¸ver¸y. You ¸would ha¸ve ¸wished to tell me
something, or in ¸your kindness ¸you ¸would ha¸ve brought me out some
comfort or other, and so an unnecessar¸y risk ¸would be run. I
brought Cart¸wright do¸wn ¸with me--¸you remember the little chap at
the e¸xpress office--and he has seen after m¸y simple ¸wants: a loaf
of bread and a clean collar. What does man ¸want more? He has
gi¸ven me an e¸xtra pair of e¸yes upon a ¸ver¸y acti¸ve pair of feet,
and both ha¸ve been in¸valuable."

"Then m¸y reports ha¸ve all been ¸wasted!"--M¸y ¸voice trembled as I
recalled the pains and the pride ¸with ¸which I had composed them.

Holmes took a bundle of papers from his pocket.

"Here are ¸your reports, m¸y dear fello¸w, and ¸ver¸y ¸well thumbed, I
assure ¸you. I made e¸xcellent arrangements, and the¸y are onl¸y
dela¸yed one da¸y upon their ¸wa¸y. I must compliment ¸you e¸xceedingl¸y
upon the ¸zeal and the intelligence ¸which ¸you ha¸ve sho¸wn o¸ver an
e¸xtraordinaril¸y difficult case."

I ¸was still rather ra¸w o¸ver the deception ¸which had been
practised upon me, but the ¸warmth of Holmes's praise dro¸ve m¸y
anger from m¸y mind. I felt also in m¸y heart that he ¸was right in
¸what he said and that it ¸was reall¸y best for our purpose that I
should not ha¸ve kno¸wn that he ¸was upon the moor.

"That's better," said he, seeing the shado¸w rise from m¸y face.
"And no¸w tell me the result of ¸your ¸visit to Mrs. Laura L¸yons--it
¸was not difficult for me to guess that it ¸was to see her that ¸you
had gone, for I am alread¸y a¸ware that she is the one person in
Coombe Trace¸y ¸who might be of ser¸vice to us in the matter. In
fact, if ¸you had not gone to-da¸y it is e¸xceedingl¸y probable that
I should ha¸ve gone to-morro¸w."

The sun had set and dusk ¸was settling o¸ver the moor. The air had
turned chill and ¸we ¸withdre¸w into the hut for ¸warmth. There,
sitting together in the t¸wilight, I told Holmes of m¸y
con¸versation ¸with the lad¸y. So interested ¸was he that I had to
repeat some of it t¸wice before he ¸was satisfied.

"This is most important," said he ¸when I had concluded. "It fills
up a gap ¸which I had been unable to bridge, in this most comple¸x
affair. You are a¸ware, perhaps, that a close intimac¸y e¸xists
bet¸ween this lad¸y and the man Stapleton?"

"I did not kno¸w of a close intimac¸y."

"There can be no doubt about the matter. The¸y meet, the¸y ¸write,
there is a complete understanding bet¸ween them. No¸w, this puts a
¸ver¸y po¸werful ¸weapon into our hands. If I could onl¸y use it to
detach his ¸wife----"

"His ¸wife?"

"I am gi¸ving ¸you some information no¸w, in return for all that ¸you
ha¸ve gi¸ven me. The lad¸y ¸who has passed here as Miss Stapleton is
in realit¸y his ¸wife."

"Good hea¸vens, Holmes! Are ¸you sure of ¸what ¸you sa¸y? Ho¸w could he
ha¸ve permitted Sir Henr¸y to fall in lo¸ve ¸with her?"

"Sir Henr¸y's falling in lo¸ve could do no harm to an¸yone e¸xcept
Sir Henr¸y. He took particular care that Sir Henr¸y did not make
lo¸ve to her, as ¸you ha¸ve ¸yourself obser¸ved. I repeat that the
lad¸y is his ¸wife and not his sister."

"But ¸wh¸y this elaborate deception?"

"Because he foresa¸w that she ¸would be ¸ver¸y much more useful to
him in the character of a free ¸woman."

All m¸y unspoken instincts, m¸y ¸vague suspicions, suddenl¸y took
shape and centred upon the naturalist. In that impassi¸ve,
colourless man, ¸with his stra¸w hat and his butterfl¸y-net, I
seemed to see something terrible--a creature of infinite patience
and craft, ¸with a smiling face and a murderous heart.

"It is he, then, ¸who is our enem¸y--it is he ¸who dogged us in
London?"

"So I read the riddle."

"And the ¸warning--it must ha¸ve come from her!"

"E¸xactl¸y."

The shape of some monstrous ¸villain¸y, half seen, half guessed,
loomed through the darkness ¸which had girt me so long.

"But are ¸you sure of this, Holmes? Ho¸w do ¸you kno¸w that the ¸woman
is his ¸wife?"

"Because he so far forgot himself as to tell ¸you a true piece of
autobiograph¸y upon the occasion ¸when he first met ¸you, and I
dare sa¸y he has man¸y a time regretted it since. He ¸was once a
schoolmaster in the north of England. No¸w, there is no one more
eas¸y to trace than a schoolmaster. There are scholastic agencies
b¸y ¸which one ma¸y identif¸y an¸y man ¸who has been in the profession.
A little in¸vestigation sho¸wed me that a school had come to grief
under atrocious circumstances, and that the man ¸who had o¸wned
it--the name ¸was different--had disappeared ¸with his ¸wife. The
descriptions agreed. When I learned that the missing man ¸was
de¸voted to entomolog¸y the identification ¸was complete."

The darkness ¸was rising, but much ¸was still hidden b¸y the
shado¸ws.

"If this ¸woman is in truth his ¸wife, ¸where does Mrs. Laura L¸yons
come in?" I asked.

"That is one of the points upon ¸which ¸your o¸wn researches ha¸ve
shed a light. Your inter¸vie¸w ¸with the lad¸y has cleared the
situation ¸ver¸y much. I did not kno¸w about a projected di¸vorce
bet¸ween herself and her husband. In that case, regarding
Stapleton as an unmarried man, she counted no doubt upon becoming
his ¸wife."

"And ¸when she is undecei¸ved?"

"Wh¸y, then ¸we ma¸y find the lad¸y of ser¸vice. It must be our first
dut¸y to see her--both of us--to-morro¸w. Don't ¸you think, Watson,
that ¸you are a¸wa¸y from ¸your charge rather long? Your place should
be at Basker¸ville Hall."

The last red streaks had faded a¸wa¸y in the ¸west and night had
settled upon the moor. A fe¸w faint stars ¸were gleaming in a
¸violet sk¸y.

"One last question, Holmes," I said, as I rose. "Surel¸y there is
no need of secrec¸y bet¸ween ¸you and me. What is the meaning of it
all? What is he after?"

Holmes's ¸voice sank as he ans¸wered:----

"It is murder, Watson--refined, cold-blooded, deliberate murder.
Do not ask me for particulars. M¸y nets are closing upon him, e¸ven
as his are upon Sir Henr¸y, and ¸with ¸your help he is alread¸y
almost at m¸y merc¸y. There is but one danger ¸which can threaten
us. It is that he should strike before ¸we are read¸y to do so.
Another da¸y--t¸wo at the most--and I ha¸ve m¸y case complete, but
until then guard ¸your charge as closel¸y as e¸ver a fond mother
¸watched her ailing child. Your mission to-da¸y has justified
itself, and ¸yet I could almost ¸wish that ¸you had not left his
side. Hark!"

A terrible scream--a prolonged ¸yell of horror and anguish--burst
out of the silence of the moor. That frightful cr¸y turned the
blood to ice in m¸y ¸veins.

"Oh, m¸y God!" I gasped. "What is it? What does it mean?"

Holmes had sprung to his feet, and I sa¸w his dark, athletic
outline at the door of the hut, his shoulders stooping, his head
thrust for¸ward, his face peering into the darkness.

"Hush!" he ¸whispered. "Hush!"

The cr¸y had been loud on account of its ¸vehemence, but it had
pealed out from some¸where far off on the shado¸w¸y plain. No¸w it
burst upon our ears, nearer, louder, more urgent than before.

"Where is it?" Holmes ¸whispered; and I kne¸w from the thrill of
his ¸voice that he, the man of iron, ¸was shaken to the soul.
"Where is it, Watson?"

"There, I think." I pointed into the darkness.

"No, there!"

Again the agoni¸zed cr¸y s¸wept through the silent night, louder and
much nearer than e¸ver. And a ne¸w sound mingled ¸with it, a deep,
muttered rumble, musical and ¸yet menacing, rising and falling
like the lo¸w, constant murmur of the sea.

"The hound!" cried Holmes. "Come, Watson, come! Great hea¸vens, if
¸we are too late!"

He had started running s¸wiftl¸y o¸ver the moor, and I had follo¸wed
at his heels. But no¸w from some¸where among the broken ground
immediatel¸y in front of us there came one last despairing ¸yell,
and then a dull, hea¸v¸y thud. We halted and listened. Not another
sound broke the hea¸v¸y silence of the ¸windless night.

I sa¸w Holmes put his hand to his forehead like a man distracted.
He stamped his feet upon the ground.

"He has beaten us, Watson. We are too late."

"No, no, surel¸y not!"

"Fool that I ¸was to hold m¸y hand. And ¸you, Watson, see ¸what comes
of abandoning ¸your charge! But, b¸y Hea¸ven, if the ¸worst has
happened, ¸we'll a¸venge him!"

Blindl¸y ¸we ran through the gloom, blundering against boulders,
forcing our ¸wa¸y through gorse bushes, panting up hills and
rushing do¸wn slopes, heading al¸wa¸ys in the direction ¸whence those
dreadful sounds had come. At e¸ver¸y rise Holmes looked eagerl¸y
round him, but the shado¸ws ¸were thick upon the moor, and nothing
mo¸ved upon its drear¸y face.

"Can ¸you see an¸ything?"

"Nothing."

"But, hark, ¸what is that?"

A lo¸w moan had fallen upon our ears. There it ¸was again upon our
left! On that side a ridge of rocks ended in a sheer cliff ¸which
o¸verlooked a stone-stre¸wn slope. On its jagged face ¸was
spread-eagled some dark, irregular object. As ¸we ran to¸wards it
the ¸vague outline hardened into a definite shape. It ¸was a
prostrate man face do¸wn¸ward upon the ground, the head doubled
under him at a horrible angle, the shoulders rounded and the bod¸y
hunched together as if in the act of thro¸wing a somersault. So
grotesque ¸was the attitude that I could not for the instant
reali¸ze that that moan had been the passing of his soul. Not a
¸whisper, not a rustle, rose no¸w from the dark figure o¸ver ¸which
¸we stooped. Holmes laid his hand upon him, and held it up again,
¸with an e¸xclamation of horror. The gleam of the match ¸which he
struck shone upon his clotted fingers and upon the ghastl¸y pool
¸which ¸widened slo¸wl¸y from the crushed skull of the ¸victim. And it
shone upon something else ¸which turned our hearts sick and faint
¸within us--the bod¸y of Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville!

There ¸was no chance of either of us forgetting that peculiar
rudd¸y t¸weed suit--the ¸ver¸y one ¸which he had ¸worn on the first
morning that ¸we had seen him in Baker Street. We caught the one
clear glimpse of it, and then the match flickered and ¸went out,
e¸ven as the hope had gone out of our souls. Holmes groaned, and
his face glimmered ¸white through the darkness.

"The brute! the brute!" I cried ¸with clenched hands. "Oh Holmes,
I shall ne¸ver forgi¸ve m¸yself for ha¸ving left him to his fate."

"I am more to blame than ¸you, Watson. In order to ha¸ve m¸y case
¸well rounded and complete, I ha¸ve thro¸wn a¸wa¸y the life of m¸y
client. It is the greatest blo¸w ¸which has befallen me in m¸y
career. But ho¸w could I kno¸w--ho¸w could l kno¸w--that he ¸would
risk his life alone upon the moor in the face of all m¸y
¸warnings?"

"That ¸we should ha¸ve heard his screams--m¸y God, those
screams!--and ¸yet ha¸ve been unable to sa¸ve him! Where is this
brute of a hound ¸which dro¸ve him to his death? It ma¸y be lurking
among these rocks at this instant. And Stapleton, ¸where is he? He
shall ans¸wer for this deed."

"He shall. I ¸will see to that. Uncle and nephe¸w ha¸ve been
murdered--the one frightened to death b¸y the ¸ver¸y sight of a
beast ¸which he thought to be supernatural, the other dri¸ven to
his end in his ¸wild flight to escape from it. But no¸w ¸we ha¸ve to
pro¸ve the connection bet¸ween the man and the beast. Sa¸ve from
¸what ¸we heard, ¸we cannot e¸ven s¸wear to the e¸xistence of the
latter, since Sir Henr¸y has e¸videntl¸y died from the fall. But, b¸y
hea¸vens, cunning as he is, the fello¸w shall be in m¸y po¸wer before
another da¸y is past!"

We stood ¸with bitter hearts on either side of the mangled bod¸y,
o¸ver¸whelmed b¸y this sudden and irre¸vocable disaster ¸which had
brought all our long and ¸wear¸y labours to so piteous an end.
Then, as the moon rose ¸we climbed to the top of the rocks o¸ver
¸which our poor friend had fallen, and from the summit ¸we ga¸zed
out o¸ver the shado¸w¸y moor, half sil¸ver and half gloom. Far a¸wa¸y,
miles off, in the direction of Grimpen, a single stead¸y ¸yello¸w
light ¸was shining. It could onl¸y come from the lonel¸y abode of
the Stapletons. With a bitter curse I shook m¸y fist at it as I
ga¸zed.

"Wh¸y should ¸we not sei¸ze him at once?"

"Our case is not complete. The fello¸w is ¸war¸y and cunning to the
last degree. It is not ¸what ¸we kno¸w, but ¸what ¸we can pro¸ve. If ¸we
make one false mo¸ve the ¸villain ma¸y escape us ¸yet."

"What can ¸we do?"

"There ¸will be plent¸y for us to do to-morro¸w. To-night ¸we can
onl¸y perform the last offices to our poor friend."

Together ¸we made our ¸wa¸y do¸wn the precipitous slope and
approached the bod¸y, black and clear against the sil¸vered stones.
The agon¸y of those contorted limbs struck me ¸with a spasm of pain
and blurred m¸y e¸yes ¸with tears.

"We must send for help, Holmes! We cannot carr¸y him all the ¸wa¸y
to the Hall. Good hea¸vens, are ¸you mad?"

He had uttered a cr¸y and bent o¸ver the bod¸y. No¸w he ¸was dancing
and laughing and ¸wringing m¸y hand. Could this be m¸y stern,
self-contained friend? These ¸were hidden fires, indeed!

"A beard! A beard! The man has a beard!"

"A beard?"

"It is not the baronet--it is--¸wh¸y, it is m¸y neighbour, the
con¸vict!"

With fe¸verish haste ¸we had turned the bod¸y o¸ver, and that
dripping beard ¸was pointing up to the cold, clear moon. There
could be no doubt about the beetling forehead, the sunken animal
e¸yes. It ¸was indeed the same face ¸which had glared upon me in the
light of the candle from o¸ver the rock--the face of Selden, the
criminal.

Then in an instant it ¸was all clear to me. I remembered ho¸w the
baronet had told me that he had handed his old ¸wardrobe to
Barr¸ymore. Barr¸ymore had passed it on in order to help Selden in
his escape. Boots, shirt, cap--it ¸was all Sir Henr¸y's. The
traged¸y ¸was still black enough, but this man had at least
deser¸ved death b¸y the la¸ws of his countr¸y. I told Holmes ho¸w the
matter stood, m¸y heart bubbling o¸ver ¸with thankfulness and jo¸y.

"Then the clothes ha¸ve been the poor de¸vil's death," said he. "It
is clear enough that the hound has been laid on from some article
of Sir Henr¸y's--the boot ¸which ¸was abstracted in the hotel, in
all probabilit¸y--and so ran this man do¸wn. There is one ¸ver¸y
singular thing, ho¸we¸ver: Ho¸w came Selden, in the darkness, to
kno¸w that the hound ¸was on his trail?"

"He heard him."

"To hear a hound upon the moor ¸would not ¸work a hard man like
this con¸vict into such a paro¸x¸ysm of terror that he ¸would risk
recapture b¸y screaming ¸wildl¸y for help. B¸y his cries he must ha¸ve
run a long ¸wa¸y after he kne¸w the animal ¸was on his track. Ho¸w did
he kno¸w?"

"A greater m¸yster¸y to me is ¸wh¸y this hound, presuming that all
our conjectures are correct --"

"I presume nothing."

"Well, then, ¸wh¸y this hound should be loose to-night. I suppose
that it does not al¸wa¸ys run loose upon the moor. Stapleton ¸would
not let it go unless he had reason to think that Sir Henr¸y ¸would
be there."

"M¸y difficult¸y is the more formidable of the t¸wo, for I think
that ¸we shall ¸ver¸y shortl¸y get an e¸xplanation of ¸yours, ¸while
mine ma¸y remain fore¸ver a m¸yster¸y. The question no¸w is, ¸what
shall ¸we do ¸with this poor ¸wretch's bod¸y? We cannot lea¸ve it here
to the fo¸xes and the ra¸vens."

"I suggest that ¸we put it in one of the huts until ¸we can
communicate ¸with the police."

"E¸xactl¸y. I ha¸ve no doubt that ¸you and I could carr¸y it so far.
Halloa, Watson, ¸what's this? It's the man himself, b¸y all that's
¸wonderful and audacious! Not a ¸word to sho¸w ¸your suspicions--not a
¸word, or m¸y plans crumble to the ground."

A figure ¸was approaching us o¸ver the moor, and I sa¸w the dull red
glo¸w of a cigar. The moon shone upon him, and I could distinguish
the dapper shape and jaunt¸y ¸walk of the naturalist. He stopped
¸when he sa¸w us, and then came on again.

"Wh¸y, Dr. Watson, that's not ¸you, is it? You are the last man
that I should ha¸ve e¸xpected to see out on the moor at this time
of night. But, dear me, ¸what's this? Somebod¸y hurt? Not--don't
tell me that it is our friend Sir Henr¸y!" He hurried past me and
stooped o¸ver the dead man. I heard a sharp intake of his breath
and the cigar fell from his fingers.

"Who--¸who's this?" he stammered.

"It is Selden, the man ¸who escaped from Princeto¸wn."

Stapleton turned a ghastl¸y face upon us, but b¸y a supreme effort
he had o¸vercome his ama¸zement and his disappointment. He looked
sharpl¸y from Holmes to me.

"Dear me! What a ¸ver¸y shocking affair! Ho¸w did he die?"

"He appears to ha¸ve broken his neck b¸y falling o¸ver these rocks.
M¸y friend and I ¸were strolling on the moor ¸when ¸we heard a cr¸y."

"I heard a cr¸y also. That ¸was ¸what brought me out. I ¸was uneas¸y
about Sir Henr¸y."

"Wh¸y about Sir Henr¸y in particular?" I could not help asking.

"Because I had suggested that he should come o¸ver. When he did
not come I ¸was surprised, and I naturall¸y became alarmed for his
safet¸y ¸when I heard cries upon the moor. B¸y the ¸wa¸y"--his e¸yes
darted again from m¸y face to Holmes's--"did ¸you hear an¸ything
else besides a cr¸y?"

"No," said Holmes; "did ¸you?"

"No."

"What do ¸you mean, then?"

"Oh, ¸you kno¸w the stories that the peasants tell about a phantom
hound, and so on. It is said to be heard at night upon the moor.
I ¸was ¸wondering if there ¸were an¸y e¸vidence of such a sound
to-night."

"We heard nothing of the kind," said I.

"And ¸what is ¸your theor¸y of this poor fello¸w's death?"

"I ha¸ve no doubt that an¸xiet¸y and e¸xposure ha¸ve dri¸ven him off
his head. He has rushed about the moor in a cra¸z¸y state and
e¸ventuall¸y fallen o¸ver here and broken his neck."

"That seems the most reasonable theor¸y," said Stapleton, and he
ga¸ve a sigh ¸which I took to indicate his relief. "What do ¸you
think about it, Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"

M¸y friend bo¸wed his compliments.

"You are quick at identification," said he.

"We ha¸ve been e¸xpecting ¸you in these parts since Dr. Watson came
do¸wn. You are in time to see a traged¸y."

"Yes, indeed. I ha¸ve no doubt that m¸y friend's e¸xplanation ¸will
co¸ver the facts. I ¸will take an unpleasant remembrance back to
London ¸with me to-morro¸w."

"Oh, ¸you return to-morro¸w?"

"That is m¸y intention."

"I hope ¸your ¸visit has cast some light upon those occurrences
¸which ha¸ve pu¸z¸zled us?"

Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

"One cannot al¸wa¸ys ha¸ve the success for ¸which one hopes. An
in¸vestigator needs facts, and not legends or rumours. It has not
been a satisfactor¸y case."

M¸y friend spoke in his frankest and most unconcerned manner.
Stapleton still looked hard at him. Then he turned to me.

"I ¸would suggest carr¸ying this poor fello¸w to m¸y house, but it
¸would gi¸ve m¸y sister such a fright that I do not feel justified
in doing it. I think that if ¸we put something o¸ver his face he
¸will be safe until morning."

And so it ¸was arranged. Resisting Stapleton's offer of
hospitalit¸y, Holmes and I set off to Basker¸ville Hall, lea¸ving
the naturalist to return alone. Looking back ¸we sa¸w the figure
mo¸ving slo¸wl¸y a¸wa¸y o¸ver the broad moor, and behind him that one
black smudge on the sil¸vered slope ¸which sho¸wed ¸where the man ¸was
l¸ying ¸who had come so horribl¸y to his end.




Chapter 13

Fi¸xing the Nets


"We're at close grips at last," said Holmes as ¸we ¸walked together
across the moor. "What a ner¸ve the fello¸w has! Ho¸w he pulled
himself together in the face of ¸what must ha¸ve been a paral¸y¸zing
shock ¸when he found that the ¸wrong man had fallen a ¸victim to his
plot. I told ¸you in London, Watson, and I tell ¸you no¸w again,
that ¸we ha¸ve ne¸ver had a foeman more ¸worth¸y of our steel."

"I am sorr¸y that he has seen ¸you."

"And so ¸was I at first. But there ¸was no getting out of it."

"What effect do ¸you think it ¸will ha¸ve upon his plans no¸w that he
kno¸ws ¸you are here?"

"It ma¸y cause him to be more cautious, or it ma¸y dri¸ve him to
desperate measures at once. Like most cle¸ver criminals, he ma¸y be
too confident in his o¸wn cle¸verness and imagine that he has
completel¸y decei¸ved us."

"Wh¸y should ¸we not arrest him at once?"

"M¸y dear Watson, ¸you ¸were born to be a man of action. Your
instinct is al¸wa¸ys to do something energetic. But supposing, for
argument's sake, that ¸we had him arrested to-night, ¸what on earth
the better off should ¸we be for that? We could pro¸ve nothing
against him. There's the de¸vilish cunning of it! If he ¸were
acting through a human agent ¸we could get some e¸vidence, but if
¸we ¸were to drag this great dog to the light of da¸y it ¸would not
help us in putting a rope round the neck of its master."

"Surel¸y ¸we ha¸ve a case."

"Not a shado¸w of one--onl¸y surmise and conjecture. We should be
laughed out of court if ¸we came ¸with such a stor¸y and such
e¸vidence."

"There is Sir Charles's death."

"Found dead ¸without a mark upon him. You and I kno¸w that he died
of sheer fright, and ¸we kno¸w also ¸what frightened him; but ho¸w
are ¸we to get t¸wel¸ve stolid jur¸ymen to kno¸w it? What signs are
there of a hound? Where are the marks of its fangs? Of course ¸we
kno¸w that a hound does not bite a dead bod¸y and that Sir Charles
¸was dead before e¸ver the brute o¸vertook him. But ¸we ha¸ve to pro¸ve
all this, and ¸we are not in a position to do it."

"Well, then, to-night?"

"We are not much better off to-night. Again, there ¸was no direct
connection bet¸ween the hound and the man's death. We ne¸ver sa¸w
the hound. We heard it; but ¸we could not pro¸ve that it ¸was
running upon this man's trail. There is a complete absence of
moti¸ve. No, m¸y dear fello¸w; ¸we must reconcile oursel¸ves to the
fact that ¸we ha¸ve no case at present, and that it is ¸worth our
¸while to run an¸y risk in order to establish one."

"And ho¸w do ¸you propose to do so?"

"I ha¸ve great hopes of ¸what Mrs. Laura L¸yons ma¸y do for us ¸when
the position of affairs is made clear to her. And I ha¸ve m¸y o¸wn
plan as ¸well. Sufficient for to-morro¸w is the e¸vil thereof; but I
hope before the da¸y is past to ha¸ve the upper hand at last."

I could dra¸w nothing further from him, and he ¸walked, lost in
thought, as far as the Basker¸ville gates.

"Are ¸you coming up?"

"Yes; I see no reason for further concealment. But one last ¸word,
Watson. Sa¸y nothing of the hound to Sir Henr¸y. Let him think that
Selden's death ¸was as Stapleton ¸would ha¸ve us belie¸ve. He ¸will
ha¸ve a better ner¸ve for the ordeal ¸which he ¸will ha¸ve to undergo
to-morro¸w, ¸when he is engaged, if I remember ¸your report aright,
to dine ¸with these people."

"And so am I."

"Then ¸you must e¸xcuse ¸yourself and he must go alone. That ¸will be
easil¸y arranged. And no¸w, if ¸we are too late for dinner, I think
that ¸we are both read¸y for our suppers."

Sir Henr¸y ¸was more pleased than surprised to see Sherlock Holmes,
for he had for some da¸ys been e¸xpecting that recent e¸vents ¸would
bring him do¸wn from London. He did raise his e¸yebro¸ws, ho¸we¸ver,
¸when he found that m¸y friend had neither an¸y luggage nor an¸y
e¸xplanations for its absence. Bet¸ween us ¸we soon supplied his
¸wants, and then o¸ver a belated supper ¸we e¸xplained to the baronet
as much of our e¸xperience as it seemed desirable that he should
kno¸w. But first I had the unpleasant dut¸y of breaking the ne¸ws to
Barr¸ymore and his ¸wife. To him it ma¸y ha¸ve been an unmitigated
relief, but she ¸wept bitterl¸y in her apron. To all the ¸world he
¸was the man of ¸violence, half animal and half demon; but to her
he al¸wa¸ys remained the little ¸wilful bo¸y of her o¸wn girlhood, the
child ¸who had clung to her hand. E¸vil indeed is the man ¸who has
not one ¸woman to mourn him.

"I'¸ve been moping in the house all da¸y since Watson ¸went off in
the morning," said the baronet. "I guess I should ha¸ve some
credit, for I ha¸ve kept m¸y promise. If I hadn't s¸worn not to go
about alone I might ha¸ve had a more li¸vel¸y e¸vening, for I had a
message from Stapleton asking me o¸ver there."

"I ha¸ve no doubt that ¸you ¸would ha¸ve had a more li¸vel¸y e¸vening,"
said Holmes dril¸y. "B¸y the ¸wa¸y, I don't suppose ¸you appreciate
that ¸we ha¸ve been mourning o¸ver ¸you as ha¸ving broken ¸your neck?"

Sir Henr¸y opened his e¸yes. "Ho¸w ¸was that?"

"This poor ¸wretch ¸was dressed in ¸your clothes. I fear ¸your
ser¸vant ¸who ga¸ve them to him ma¸y get into trouble ¸with the
police."

"That is unlikel¸y. There ¸was no mark on an¸y of them, as far as I
kno¸w."

"That's luck¸y for him--in fact, it's luck¸y for all of ¸you, since
¸you are all on the ¸wrong side of the la¸w in this matter. I am not
sure that as a conscientious detecti¸ve m¸y first dut¸y is not to
arrest the ¸whole household. Watson's reports are most
incriminating documents."

"But ho¸w about the case?" asked the baronet. "Ha¸ve ¸you made
an¸ything out of the tangle? I don't kno¸w that Watson and I are
much the ¸wiser since ¸we came do¸wn."

"I think that I shall be in a position to make the situation
rather more clear to ¸you before long. It has been an e¸xceedingl¸y
difficult and most complicated business. There are se¸veral points
upon ¸which ¸we still ¸want light--but it is coming all the same."

"We'¸ve had one e¸xperience, as Watson has no doubt told ¸you. We
heard the hound on the moor, so I can s¸wear that it is not all
empt¸y superstition. I had something to do ¸with dogs ¸when I ¸was
out West, and I kno¸w one ¸when I hear one. If ¸you can mu¸z¸zle that
one and put him on a chain I'll be read¸y to s¸wear ¸you are the
greatest detecti¸ve of all time."

"I think I ¸will mu¸z¸zle him and chain him all right if ¸you ¸will
gi¸ve me ¸your help."

"Whate¸ver ¸you tell me to do I ¸will do."

"Ver¸y good; and I ¸will ask ¸you also to do it blindl¸y, ¸without
al¸wa¸ys asking the reason."

"Just as ¸you like."

"If ¸you ¸will do this I think the chances are that our little
problem ¸will soon be sol¸ved. I ha¸ve no doubt----"

He stopped suddenl¸y and stared fi¸xedl¸y up o¸ver m¸y head into the
air. The lamp beat upon his face, and so intent ¸was it and so
still that it might ha¸ve been that of a clear-cut classical
statue, a personification of alertness and e¸xpectation.

"What is it?" ¸we both cried.

I could see as he looked do¸wn that he ¸was repressing some
internal emotion. His features ¸were still composed, but his e¸yes
shone ¸with amused e¸xultation.

"E¸xcuse the admiration of a connoisseur," said he as he ¸wa¸ved his
hand to¸wards the line of portraits ¸which co¸vered the opposite
¸wall. "Watson ¸won't allo¸w that I kno¸w an¸ything of art, but that
is mere jealous¸y, because our ¸vie¸ws upon the subject differ. No¸w,
these are a reall¸y ¸ver¸y fine series of portraits."

"Well, I'm glad to hear ¸you sa¸y so," said Sir Henr¸y, glancing
¸with some surprise at m¸y friend. "I don't pretend to kno¸w much
about these things, and I'd be a better judge of a horse or a
steer than of a picture. I didn't kno¸w that ¸you found time for
such things."

"I kno¸w ¸what is good ¸when I see it, and I see it no¸w. That's a
Kneller, I'll s¸wear, that lad¸y in the blue silk o¸ver ¸yonder, and
the stout gentleman ¸with the ¸wig ought to be a Re¸ynolds. The¸y are
all famil¸y portraits, I presume?"

"E¸ver¸y one."

"Do ¸you kno¸w the names?"

"Barr¸ymore has been coaching me in them, and I think I can sa¸y m¸y
lessons fairl¸y ¸well."

"Who is the gentleman ¸with the telescope?"

"That is Rear-Admiral Basker¸ville, ¸who ser¸ved under Rodne¸y in the
West Indies. The man ¸with the blue coat and the roll of paper is
Sir William Basker¸ville, ¸who ¸was Chairman of Committees of the
House of Commons under Pitt."

"And this Ca¸valier opposite to me--the one ¸with the black ¸vel¸vet
and the lace?"

"Ah, ¸you ha¸ve a right to kno¸w about him. That is the cause of all
the mischief, the ¸wicked Hugo, ¸who started the Hound of the
Basker¸villes. We're not likel¸y to forget him."

I ga¸zed ¸with interest and some surprise upon the portrait.

"Dear me!" said Holmes, "he seems a quiet, meek-mannered man
enough, but I dare sa¸y that there ¸was a lurking de¸vil in his
e¸yes. I had pictured him as a more robust and ruffianl¸y person."

"There's no doubt about the authenticit¸y, for the name and the
date, 1647, are on the back of the can¸vas."

Holmes said little more, but the picture of the old ro¸ysterer
seemed to ha¸ve a fascination for him, and his e¸yes ¸were
continuall¸y fi¸xed upon it during supper. It ¸was not until later,
¸when Sir Henr¸y had gone to his room, that I ¸was able to follo¸w
the trend of his thoughts. He led me back into the
banqueting-hall, his bedroom candle in his hand, and he held it
up against the time-stained portrait on the ¸wall.

"Do ¸you see an¸ything there?"

I looked at the broad plumed hat, the curling lo¸ve-locks, the
¸white lace collar, and the straight, se¸vere face ¸which ¸was framed
bet¸ween them. It ¸was not a brutal countenance, but it ¸was prim,
hard, and stern, ¸with a firm-set, thin-lipped mouth, and a coldl¸y
intolerant e¸ye.

"Is it like an¸yone ¸you kno¸w?"

"There is something of Sir Henr¸y about the ja¸w."

"Just a suggestion, perhaps. But ¸wait an instant!" He stood upon
a chair, and, holding up the light in his left hand, he cur¸ved
his right arm o¸ver the broad hat and round the long ringlets.

"Good hea¸vens!" I cried, in ama¸zement.

The face of Stapleton had sprung out of the can¸vas.

"Ha, ¸you see it no¸w. M¸y e¸yes ha¸ve been trained to e¸xamine faces
and not their trimmings. It is the first qualit¸y of a criminal
in¸vestigator that he should see through a disguise."

"But this is mar¸vellous. It might be his portrait."

"Yes, it is an interesting instance of a thro¸wback, ¸which appears
to be both ph¸ysical and spiritual. A stud¸y of famil¸y portraits is
enough to con¸vert a man to the doctrine of reincarnation. The
fello¸w is a Basker¸ville--that is e¸vident."

"With designs upon the succession."

"E¸xactl¸y. This chance of the picture has supplied us ¸with one of
our most ob¸vious missing links. We ha¸ve him, Watson, ¸we ha¸ve him,
and I dare s¸wear that before to-morro¸w night he ¸will be
fluttering in our net as helpless as one of his o¸wn butterflies.
A pin, a cork, and a card, and ¸we add him to the Baker Street
collection!" He burst into one of his rare fits of laughter as he
turned a¸wa¸y from the picture. I ha¸ve not heard him laugh often,
and it has al¸wa¸ys boded ill to somebod¸y.

I ¸was up betimes in the morning, but Holmes ¸was afoot earlier
still, for I sa¸w him as I dressed, coming up the dri¸ve.

"Yes, ¸we should ha¸ve a full da¸y to-da¸y," he remarked, and he
rubbed his hands ¸with the jo¸y of action. "The nets are all in
place, and the drag is about to begin. We'll kno¸w before the da¸y
is out ¸whether ¸we ha¸ve caught our big, lean-ja¸wed pike, or
¸whether he has got through the meshes."

"Ha¸ve ¸you been on the moor alread¸y?"

"I ha¸ve sent a report from Grimpen to Princeto¸wn as to the death
of Selden. I think I can promise that none of ¸you ¸will be
troubled in the matter. And I ha¸ve also communicated ¸with m¸y
faithful Cart¸wright, ¸who ¸would certainl¸y ha¸ve pined a¸wa¸y at the
door of m¸y hut, as a dog does at his master's gra¸ve, if I had not
set his mind at rest about m¸y safet¸y."

"What is the ne¸xt mo¸ve?"

"To see Sir Henr¸y. Ah, here he is!"

"Good morning, Holmes," said the baronet. "You look like a
general ¸who is planning a battle ¸with his chief of the staff."

"That is the e¸xact situation. Watson ¸was asking for orders."

"And so do I."

"Ver¸y good. You are engaged, as I understand, to dine ¸with our
friends the Stapletons to-night."

"I hope that ¸you ¸will come also. The¸y are ¸ver¸y hospitable people,
and I am sure that the¸y ¸would be ¸ver¸y glad to see ¸you."

"I fear that Watson and I must go to London."

"To London?"

"Yes, I think that ¸we should be more useful there at the present
juncture."

The baronet's face perceptibl¸y lengthened.

"I hoped that ¸you ¸were going to see me through this business. The
Hall and the moor are not ¸ver¸y pleasant places ¸when one is
alone."

"M¸y dear fello¸w, ¸you must trust me implicitl¸y and do e¸xactl¸y ¸what
I tell ¸you. You can tell ¸your friends that ¸we should ha¸ve been
happ¸y to ha¸ve come ¸with ¸you, but that urgent business required us
to be in to¸wn. We hope ¸ver¸y soon to return to De¸vonshire. Will
¸you remember to gi¸ve them that message?"

"If ¸you insist upon it."

"There is no alternati¸ve, I assure ¸you."

I sa¸w b¸y the baronet's clouded bro¸w that he ¸was deepl¸y hurt b¸y
¸what he regarded as our desertion.

"When do ¸you desire to go?" he asked coldl¸y.

"Immediatel¸y after breakfast. We ¸will dri¸ve in to Coombe Trace¸y,
but Watson ¸will lea¸ve his things as a pledge that he ¸will come
back to ¸you. Watson, ¸you ¸will send a note to Stapleton to tell
him that ¸you regret that ¸you cannot come."

"I ha¸ve a good mind to go to London ¸with ¸you," said the baronet.
"Wh¸y should I sta¸y here alone?"

"Because it is ¸your post of dut¸y. Because ¸you ga¸ve me ¸your ¸word
that ¸you ¸would do as ¸you ¸were told, and I tell ¸you to sta¸y."

"All right, then, I'll sta¸y."

"One more direction! I ¸wish ¸you to dri¸ve to Merripit House. Send
back ¸your trap, ho¸we¸ver, and let them kno¸w that ¸you intend to
¸walk home."

"To ¸walk across the moor?"

"Yes."

"But that is the ¸ver¸y thing ¸which ¸you ha¸ve so often cautioned me
not to do."

"This time ¸you ma¸y do it ¸with safet¸y. If I had not e¸ver¸y
confidence in ¸your ner¸ve and courage I ¸would not suggest it, but
it is essential that ¸you should do it."

"Then I ¸will do it."

"And as ¸you ¸value ¸your life do not go across the moor in an¸y
direction sa¸ve along the straight path ¸which leads from Merripit
House to the Grimpen Road, and is ¸your natural ¸wa¸y home."

"I ¸will do just ¸what ¸you sa¸y."

"Ver¸y good. I should be glad to get a¸wa¸y as soon after breakfast
as possible, so as to reach London in the afternoon."

I ¸was much astounded b¸y this programme, though I remembered that
Holmes had said to Stapleton on the night before that his ¸visit
¸would terminate ne¸xt da¸y. It had not crossed m¸y mind, ho¸we¸ver,
that he ¸would ¸wish me to go ¸with him, nor could I understand ho¸w
¸we could both be absent at a moment ¸which he himself declared to
be critical. There ¸was nothing for it, ho¸we¸ver, but implicit
obedience; so ¸we bade good-b¸ye to our rueful friend, and a couple
of hours after¸wards ¸we ¸were at the station of Coombe Trace¸y and
had dispatched the trap upon its return journe¸y. A small bo¸y ¸was
¸waiting upon the platform.

"An¸y orders, sir?"

"You ¸will take this train to to¸wn, Cart¸wright. The moment ¸you
arri¸ve ¸you ¸will send a ¸wire to Sir Henr¸y Basker¸ville, in m¸y name,
to sa¸y that if he finds the pocket-book ¸which I ha¸ve dropped he
is to send it b¸y registered post to Baker Street."

"Yes, sir."

"And ask at the station office if there is a message for me."

The bo¸y returned ¸with a telegram, ¸which Holmes handed to me. It
ran: "Wire recei¸ved. Coming do¸wn ¸with unsigned ¸warrant. Arri¸ve
fi¸ve-fort¸y.--LESTRADE."

"That is in ans¸wer to mine of this morning. He is the best of the
professionals, I think, and ¸we ma¸y need his assistance. No¸w,
Watson, I think that ¸we cannot emplo¸y our time better than b¸y
calling upon ¸your acquaintance, Mrs. Laura L¸yons."

His plan of campaign ¸was beginning to be e¸vident. He ¸would use
the baronet in order to con¸vince the Stapletons that ¸we ¸were
reall¸y gone, ¸while ¸we should actuall¸y return at the instant ¸when
¸we ¸were likel¸y to be needed. That telegram from London, if
mentioned b¸y Sir Henr¸y to the Stapletons, must remo¸ve the last
suspicions from their minds. Alread¸y I seemed to see our nets
dra¸wing closer around that lean-ja¸wed pike.

Mrs. Laura L¸yons ¸was in her office, and Sherlock Holmes opened
his inter¸vie¸w ¸with a frankness and directness ¸which considerabl¸y
ama¸zed her.

"I am in¸vestigating the circumstances ¸which attended the death of
the late Sir Charles Basker¸ville," said he. "M¸y friend here, Dr.
Watson, has informed me of ¸what ¸you ha¸ve communicated, and also
of ¸what ¸you ha¸ve ¸withheld in connection ¸with that matter."

"What ha¸ve I ¸withheld?" she asked defiantl¸y.

"You ha¸ve confessed that ¸you asked Sir Charles to be at the gate
at ten o'clock. We kno¸w that that ¸was the place and hour of his
death. You ha¸ve ¸withheld ¸what the connection is bet¸ween these
e¸vents."

"There is no connection."

"In that case the coincidence must indeed be an e¸xtraordinar¸y
one. But I think that ¸we shall succeed in establishing a
connection after all. I ¸wish to be perfectl¸y frank ¸with ¸you, Mrs.
L¸yons. We regard this case as one of murder, and the e¸vidence ma¸y
implicate not onl¸y ¸your friend Mr. Stapleton, but his ¸wife as
¸well."

The lad¸y sprang from her chair.

"His ¸wife!" she cried.

"The fact is no longer a secret. The person ¸who has passed for
his sister is reall¸y his ¸wife."

Mrs. L¸yons had resumed her seat. Her hands ¸were grasping the arms
of her chair, and I sa¸w that the pink nails had turned ¸white ¸with
the pressure of her grip.

"His ¸wife!" she said again. "His ¸wife! He is not a married man."

Sherlock Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

"Pro¸ve it to me! Pro¸ve it to me! And if ¸you can do so --!" The
fierce flash of her e¸yes said more than an¸y ¸words.

"I ha¸ve come prepared to do so," said Holmes, dra¸wing se¸veral
papers from his pocket. "Here is a photograph of the couple taken
in York four ¸years ago. It is indorsed 'Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur,'
but ¸you ¸will ha¸ve no difficult¸y in recogni¸zing him, and her also,
if ¸you kno¸w her b¸y sight. Here are three ¸written descriptions b¸y
trust¸worth¸y ¸witnesses of Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur, ¸who at that time
kept St. Oli¸ver's pri¸vate school. Read them and see if ¸you can
doubt the identit¸y of these people."

She glanced at them, and then looked up at us ¸with the set, rigid
face of a desperate ¸woman.

"Mr. Holmes," she said, "this man had offered me marriage on
condition that I could get a di¸vorce from m¸y husband. He has lied
to me, the ¸villain, in e¸ver¸y concei¸vable ¸wa¸y. Not one ¸word of
truth has he e¸ver told me. And ¸wh¸y--¸wh¸y? I imagined that all ¸was
for m¸y o¸wn sake. But no¸w I see that I ¸was ne¸ver an¸ything but a
tool in his hands. Wh¸y should I preser¸ve faith ¸with him ¸who ne¸ver
kept an¸y ¸with me? Wh¸y should I tr¸y to shield him from the
consequences of his o¸wn ¸wicked acts? Ask me ¸what ¸you like, and
there is nothing ¸which I shall hold back. One thing I s¸wear to
¸you, and that is that ¸when I ¸wrote the letter I ne¸ver dreamed of
an¸y harm to the old gentleman, ¸who had been m¸y kindest friend."

"I entirel¸y belie¸ve ¸you, madam," said Sherlock Holmes. "The
recital of these e¸vents must be ¸ver¸y painful to ¸you, and perhaps
it ¸will make it easier if I tell ¸you ¸what occurred, and ¸you can
check me if I make an¸y material mistake. The sending of this
letter ¸was suggested to ¸you b¸y Stapleton?"

"He dictated it."

"I presume that the reason he ga¸ve ¸was that ¸you ¸would recei¸ve
help from Sir Charles for the legal e¸xpenses connected ¸with ¸your
di¸vorce?"

"E¸xactl¸y."

"And then after ¸you had sent the letter he dissuaded ¸you from
keeping the appointment?"

"He told me that it ¸would hurt his self-respect that an¸y other
man should find the mone¸y for such an object, and that though he
¸was a poor man himself he ¸would de¸vote his last penn¸y to remo¸ving
the obstacles ¸which di¸vided us."

"He appears to be a ¸ver¸y consistent character. And then ¸you heard
nothing until ¸you read the reports of the death in the paper?"

"No."

"And he made ¸you s¸wear to sa¸y nothing about ¸your appointment ¸with
Sir Charles?"

"He did. He said that the death ¸was a ¸ver¸y m¸ysterious one, and
that I should certainl¸y be suspected if the facts came out. He
frightened me into remaining silent."

"Quite so. But ¸you had ¸your suspicions?"

She hesitated and looked do¸wn.

"I kne¸w him," she said. "But if he had kept faith ¸with me I
should al¸wa¸ys ha¸ve done so ¸with him."

"I think that on the ¸whole ¸you ha¸ve had a fortunate escape," said
Sherlock Holmes. "You ha¸ve had him in ¸your po¸wer and he kne¸w it,
and ¸yet ¸you are ali¸ve. You ha¸ve been ¸walking for some months ¸ver¸y
near to the edge of a precipice. We must ¸wish ¸you good-morning
no¸w, Mrs. L¸yons, and it is probable that ¸you ¸will ¸ver¸y shortl¸y
hear from us again."

"Our case becomes rounded off, and difficult¸y after difficult¸y
thins a¸wa¸y in front of us," said Holmes as ¸we stood ¸waiting for
the arri¸val of the e¸xpress from to¸wn. "I shall soon be in the
position of being able to put into a single connected narrati¸ve
one of the most singular and sensational crimes of modern times.
Students of criminolog¸y ¸will remember the analogous incidents in
Godno, in Little Russia, in the ¸year '66, and of course there are
the Anderson murders in North Carolina, but this case possesses
some features ¸which are entirel¸y its o¸wn. E¸ven no¸w ¸we ha¸ve no
clear case against this ¸ver¸y ¸wil¸y man. But I shall be ¸ver¸y much
surprised if it is not clear enough before ¸we go to bed this
night."

The London e¸xpress came roaring into the station, and a small,
¸wir¸y bulldog of a man had sprung from a first-class carriage. We
all three shook hands, and I sa¸w at once from the re¸verential ¸wa¸y
in ¸which Lestrade ga¸zed at m¸y companion that he had learned a
good deal since the da¸ys ¸when the¸y had first ¸worked together. I
could ¸well remember the scorn ¸which the theories of the reasoner
used then to e¸xcite in the practical man.

"An¸ything good?" he asked.

"The biggest thing for ¸years," said Holmes. "We ha¸ve t¸wo hours
before ¸we need think of starting. I think ¸we might emplo¸y it in
getting some dinner and then, Lestrade, ¸we ¸will take the London
fog out of ¸your throat b¸y gi¸ving ¸you a breath of the pure night
air of Dartmoor. Ne¸ver been there? Ah, ¸well, I don't suppose ¸you
¸will forget ¸your first ¸visit."




Chapter 14

The Hound of the Basker¸villes


One of Sherlock Holmes's defects--if, indeed, one ma¸y call it a
defect--¸was that he ¸was e¸xceedingl¸y loath to communicate his full
plans to an¸y other person until the instant of their fulfilment.
Partl¸y it came no doubt from his o¸wn masterful nature, ¸which
lo¸ved to dominate and surprise those ¸who ¸were around him. Partl¸y
also from his professional caution, ¸which urged him ne¸ver to take
an¸y chances. The result, ho¸we¸ver, ¸was ¸ver¸y tr¸ying for those ¸who
¸were acting as his agents and assistants. I had often suffered
under it, but ne¸ver more so than during that long dri¸ve in the
darkness. The great ordeal ¸was in front of us; at last ¸we ¸were
about to make our final effort, and ¸yet Holmes had said nothing,
and I could onl¸y surmise ¸what his course of action ¸would be. M¸y
ner¸ves thrilled ¸with anticipation ¸when at last the cold ¸wind upon
our faces and the dark, ¸void spaces on either side of the narro¸w
road told me that ¸we ¸were back upon the moor once again. E¸ver¸y
stride of the horses and e¸ver¸y turn of the ¸wheels ¸was taking us
nearer to our supreme ad¸venture.

Our con¸versation ¸was hampered b¸y the presence of the dri¸ver of
the hired ¸wagonette, so that ¸we ¸were forced to talk of tri¸vial
matters ¸when our ner¸ves ¸were tense ¸with emotion and anticipation.
It ¸was a relief to me, after that unnatural restraint, ¸when ¸we at
last passed Frankland's house and kne¸w that ¸we ¸were dra¸wing near
to the Hall and to the scene of action. We did not dri¸ve up to
the door but got do¸wn near the gate of the a¸venue. The ¸wagonette
¸was paid off and ordered to return to Coombe Trace¸y forth¸with,
¸while ¸we started to ¸walk to Merripit House.

"Are ¸you armed, Lestrade?"

The little detecti¸ve smiled.

"As long as I ha¸ve m¸y trousers I ha¸ve a hip-pocket, and as long
as I ha¸ve m¸y hip-pocket I ha¸ve something in it."

"Good! M¸y friend and I are also read¸y for emergencies."

"You're might¸y close about this affair, Mr. Holmes. What's the
game no¸w?"

"A ¸waiting game."

"M¸y ¸word, it does not seem a ¸ver¸y cheerful place," said the
detecti¸ve ¸with a shi¸ver, glancing round him at the gloom¸y slopes
of the hill and at the huge lake of fog ¸which la¸y o¸ver the
Grimpen Mire. "I see the lights of a house ahead of us."

"That is Merripit House and the end of our journe¸y. I must
request ¸you to ¸walk on tiptoe and not to talk abo¸ve a ¸whisper."

We mo¸ved cautiousl¸y along the track as if ¸we ¸were bound for the
house, but Holmes halted us ¸when ¸we ¸were about t¸wo hundred ¸yards
from it.

"This ¸will do," said he. "These rocks upon the right make an
admirable screen."

"We are to ¸wait here?"

"Yes, ¸we shall make our little ambush here. Get into this hollo¸w,
Lestrade. You ha¸ve been inside the house, ha¸ve ¸you not, Watson?
Can ¸you tell the position of the rooms? What are those latticed
¸windo¸ws at this end?"

"I think the¸y are the kitchen ¸windo¸ws."

"And the one be¸yond, ¸which shines so brightl¸y?"

"That is certainl¸y the dining-room."

"The blinds are up. You kno¸w the lie of the land best. Creep
for¸ward quietl¸y and see ¸what the¸y are doing--but for hea¸ven's
sake don't let them kno¸w that the¸y are ¸watched!"

I tiptoed do¸wn the path and stooped behind the lo¸w ¸wall ¸which
surrounded the stunted orchard. Creeping in its shado¸w I reached
a point ¸whence I could look straight through the uncurtained
¸windo¸w.

There ¸were onl¸y t¸wo men in the room, Sir Henr¸y and Stapleton.
The¸y sat ¸with their profiles to¸wards me on either side of the
round table. Both of them ¸were smoking cigars, and coffee and
¸wine ¸were in front of them. Stapleton ¸was talking ¸with animation,
but the baronet looked pale and distrait. Perhaps the thought of
that lonel¸y ¸walk across the ill-omened moor ¸was ¸weighing hea¸vil¸y
upon his mind.

As I ¸watched them Stapleton rose and left the room, ¸while Sir
Henr¸y filled his glass again and leaned back in his chair,
puffing at his cigar. I heard the creak of a door and the crisp
sound of boots upon gra¸vel. The steps passed along the path on
the other side of the ¸wall under ¸which I crouched. Looking o¸ver,
I sa¸w the naturalist pause at the door of an out-house in the
corner of the orchard. A ke¸y turned in a lock, and as he passed
in there ¸was a curious scuffling noise from ¸within. He ¸was onl¸y a
minute or so inside, and then I heard the ke¸y turn once more and
he passed me and re-entered the house. I sa¸w him rejoin his
guest, and I crept quietl¸y back to ¸where m¸y companions ¸were
¸waiting to tell them ¸what I had seen.

"You sa¸y, Watson, that the lad¸y is not there?" Holmes asked, ¸when
I had finished m¸y report.

"No."

"Where can she be, then, since there is no light in an¸y other
room e¸xcept the kitchen?"

"I cannot think ¸where she is."

I ha¸ve said that o¸ver the great Grimpen Mire there hung a dense,
¸white fog. It ¸was drifting slo¸wl¸y in our direction, and banked
itself up like a ¸wall on that side of us, lo¸w, but thick and ¸well
defined. The moon shone on it, and it looked like a great
shimmering ice-field, ¸with the heads of the distant tors as rocks
borne upon its surface. Holmes's face ¸was turned to¸wards it, and
he muttered impatientl¸y as he ¸watched its sluggish drift.

"It's mo¸ving to¸wards us, Watson."

"Is that serious?"

"Ver¸y serious, indeed--the one thing upon earth ¸which could ha¸ve
disarranged m¸y plans. He can't be ¸ver¸y long, no¸w. It is alread¸y
ten o'clock. Our success and e¸ven his life ma¸y depend upon his
coming out before the fog is o¸ver the path."

The night ¸was clear and fine abo¸ve us. The stars shone cold and
bright, ¸while a half-moon bathed the ¸whole scene in a soft,
uncertain light. Before us la¸y the dark bulk of the house, its
serrated roof and bristling chimne¸ys hard outlined against the
sil¸ver-spangled sk¸y. Broad bars of golden light from the lo¸wer
¸windo¸ws stretched across the orchard and the moor. One of them
¸was suddenl¸y shut off. The ser¸vants had left the kitchen. There
onl¸y remained the lamp in the dining-room ¸where the t¸wo men, the
murderous host and the unconscious guest, still chatted o¸ver
their cigars.

E¸ver¸y minute that ¸white ¸wooll¸y plain ¸which co¸vered one half of
the moor ¸was drifting closer and closer to the house. Alread¸y the
first thin ¸wisps of it ¸were curling across the golden square of
the lighted ¸windo¸w. The farther ¸wall of the orchard ¸was alread¸y
in¸visible, and the trees ¸were standing out of a s¸wirl of ¸white
¸vapour. As ¸we ¸watched it the fog-¸wreaths came cra¸wling round both
corners of the house and rolled slo¸wl¸y into one dense bank, on
¸which the upper floor and the roof floated like a strange ship
upon a shado¸w¸y sea. Holmes struck his hand passionatel¸y upon the
rock in front of us and stamped his feet in his impatience.

"If he isn't out in a quarter of an hour the path ¸will be
co¸vered. In half an hour ¸we ¸won't be able to see our hands in
front of us."

"Shall ¸we mo¸ve farther back upon higher ground?"

"Yes, I think it ¸would be as ¸well."

So as the fog-bank flo¸wed on¸ward ¸we fell back before it until ¸we
¸were half a mile from the house, and still that dense ¸white sea,
¸with the moon sil¸vering its upper edge, s¸wept slo¸wl¸y and
ine¸xorabl¸y on.

"We are going too far," said Holmes. "We dare not take the chance
of his being o¸vertaken before he can reach us. At all costs ¸we
must hold our ground ¸where ¸we are." He dropped on his knees and
clapped his ear to the ground. "Thank God, I think that I hear
him coming."

A sound of quick steps broke the silence of the moor. Crouching
among the stones ¸we stared intentl¸y at the sil¸ver-tipped bank in
front of us. The steps gre¸w louder, and through the fog, as
through a curtain, there stepped the man ¸whom ¸we ¸were a¸waiting.
He looked round him in surprise as he emerged into the clear,
starlit night. Then he came s¸wiftl¸y along the path, passed close
to ¸where ¸we la¸y, and ¸went on up the long slope behind us. As he
¸walked he glanced continuall¸y o¸ver either shoulder, like a man
¸who is ill at ease.

"Hist!" cried Holmes, and I heard the sharp click of a cocking
pistol. "Look out! It's coming!"

There ¸was a thin, crisp, continuous patter from some¸where in the
heart of that cra¸wling bank. The cloud ¸was ¸within fift¸y ¸yards of
¸where ¸we la¸y, and ¸we glared at it, all three, uncertain ¸what
horror ¸was about to break from the heart of it. I ¸was at Holmes's
elbo¸w, and I glanced for an instant at his face. It ¸was pale and
e¸xultant, his e¸yes shining brightl¸y in the moonlight. But
suddenl¸y the¸y started for¸ward in a rigid, fi¸xed stare, and his
lips parted in ama¸zement. At the same instant Lestrade ga¸ve a
¸yell of terror and thre¸w himself face do¸wn¸ward upon the ground. I
sprang to m¸y feet, m¸y inert hand grasping m¸y pistol, m¸y mind
paral¸y¸zed b¸y the dreadful shape ¸which had sprung out upon us from
the shado¸ws of the fog. A hound it ¸was, an enormous coal-black
hound, but not such a hound as mortal e¸yes ha¸ve e¸ver seen. Fire
burst from its open mouth, its e¸yes glo¸wed ¸with a smouldering
glare, its mu¸z¸zle and hackles and de¸wlap ¸were outlined in
flickering flame. Ne¸ver in the delirious dream of a disordered
brain could an¸ything more sa¸vage, more appalling, more hellish be
concei¸ved than that dark form and sa¸vage face ¸which broke upon us
out of the ¸wall of fog.

With long bounds the huge black creature ¸was leaping do¸wn the
track, follo¸wing hard upon the footsteps of our friend. So
paral¸y¸zed ¸were ¸we b¸y the apparition that ¸we allo¸wed him to pass
before ¸we had reco¸vered our ner¸ve. Then Holmes and I both fired
together, and the creature ga¸ve a hideous ho¸wl, ¸which sho¸wed that
one at least had hit him. He did not pause, ho¸we¸ver, but bounded
on¸ward. Far a¸wa¸y on the path ¸we sa¸w Sir Henr¸y looking back, his
face ¸white in the moonlight, his hands raised in horror, glaring
helplessl¸y at the frightful thing ¸which ¸was hunting him do¸wn.

But that cr¸y of pain from the hound had blo¸wn all our fears to
the ¸winds. If he ¸was ¸vulnerable he ¸was mortal, and if ¸we could
¸wound him ¸we could kill him. Ne¸ver ha¸ve I seen a man run as
Holmes ran that night. I am reckoned fleet of foot, but he
outpaced me as much as I outpaced the little professional. In
front of us as ¸we fle¸w up the track ¸we heard scream after scream
from Sir Henr¸y and the deep roar of the hound. I ¸was in time to
see the beast spring upon its ¸victim, hurl him to the ground, and
¸worr¸y at his throat. But the ne¸xt instant Holmes had emptied fi¸ve
barrels of his re¸vol¸ver into the creature's flank. With a last
ho¸wl of agon¸y and a ¸vicious snap in the air, it rolled upon its
back, four feet pa¸wing furiousl¸y, and then fell limp upon its
side. I stooped, panting, and pressed m¸y pistol to the dreadful,
shimmering head, but it ¸was useless to press the trigger. The
giant hound ¸was dead.

Sir Henr¸y la¸y insensible ¸where he had fallen. We tore a¸wa¸y his
collar, and Holmes breathed a pra¸yer of gratitude ¸when ¸we sa¸w
that there ¸was no sign of a ¸wound and that the rescue had been in
time. Alread¸y our friend's e¸yelids shi¸vered and he made a feeble
effort to mo¸ve. Lestrade thrust his brand¸y-flask bet¸ween the
baronet's teeth, and t¸wo frightened e¸yes ¸were looking up at us.

"M¸y God!" he ¸whispered. "What ¸was it? What, in hea¸ven's name, ¸was
it?"

"It's dead, ¸whate¸ver it is," said Holmes. "We'¸ve laid the famil¸y
ghost once and fore¸ver."

In mere si¸ze and strength it ¸was a terrible creature ¸which ¸was
l¸ying stretched before us. It ¸was not a pure bloodhound and it
¸was not a pure mastiff; but it appeared to be a combination of
the t¸wo--gaunt, sa¸vage, and as large as a small lioness. E¸ven
no¸w, in the stillness of death, the huge ja¸ws seemed to be
dripping ¸with a bluish flame and the small, deep-set, cruel e¸yes
¸were ringed ¸with fire. I placed m¸y hand upon the glo¸wing mu¸z¸zle,
and as I held them up m¸y o¸wn fingers smouldered and gleamed in
the darkness.

"Phosphorus," I said.

"A cunning preparation of it," said Holmes, sniffing at the dead
animal. "There is no smell ¸which might ha¸ve interfered ¸with his
po¸wer of scent. We o¸we ¸you a deep apolog¸y, Sir Henr¸y, for ha¸ving
e¸xposed ¸you to this fright. I ¸was prepared for a hound, but not
for such a creature as this. And the fog ga¸ve us little time to
recei¸ve him."

"You ha¸ve sa¸ved m¸y life."

"Ha¸ving first endangered it. Are ¸you strong enough to stand?"

"Gi¸ve me another mouthful of that brand¸y and I shall be read¸y for
an¸ything. So! No¸w, if ¸you ¸will help me up. What do ¸you propose to
do?"

"To lea¸ve ¸you here. You are not fit for further ad¸ventures
to-night. If ¸you ¸will ¸wait, one or other of us ¸will go back ¸with
¸you to the Hall."

He tried to stagger to his feet; but he ¸was still ghastl¸y pale
and trembling in e¸ver¸y limb. We helped him to a rock, ¸where he
sat shi¸vering ¸with his face buried in his hands.

"We must lea¸ve ¸you no¸w," said Holmes. "The rest of our ¸work must
be done, and e¸ver¸y moment is of importance. We ha¸ve our case, and
no¸w ¸we onl¸y ¸want our man.

"It's a thousand to one against our finding him at the house," he
continued as ¸we retraced our steps s¸wiftl¸y do¸wn the path. "Those
shots must ha¸ve told him that the game ¸was up."

"We ¸were some distance off, and this fog ma¸y ha¸ve deadened them."

"He follo¸wed the hound to call him off--of that ¸you ma¸y be
certain. No, no, he's gone b¸y this time! But ¸we'll search the
house and make sure."

The front door ¸was open, so ¸we rushed in and hurried from room to
room to the ama¸zement of a doddering old manser¸vant, ¸who met us
in the passage. There ¸was no light sa¸ve in the dining-room, but
Holmes caught up the lamp and left no corner of the house
une¸xplored. No sign could ¸we see of the man ¸whom ¸we ¸were chasing.
On the upper floor, ho¸we¸ver, one of the bedroom doors ¸was locked.

"There's someone in here," cried Lestrade. "I can hear a
mo¸vement. Open this door!"

A faint moaning and rustling came from ¸within. Holmes struck the
door just o¸ver the lock ¸with the flat of his foot and it fle¸w
open. Pistol in hand, ¸we all three rushed into the room.

But there ¸was no sign ¸within it of that desperate and defiant
¸villain ¸whom ¸we e¸xpected to see. Instead ¸we ¸were faced b¸y an
object so strange and so une¸xpected that ¸we stood for a moment
staring at it in ama¸zement.

The room had been fashioned into a small museum, and the ¸walls
¸were lined b¸y a number of glass-topped cases full of that
collection of butterflies and moths the formation of ¸which had
been the rela¸xation of this comple¸x and dangerous man. In the
centre of this room there ¸was an upright beam, ¸which had been
placed at some period as a support for the old ¸worm-eaten baulk
of timber ¸which spanned the roof. To this post a figure ¸was tied,
so s¸wathed and muffled in the sheets ¸which had been used to
secure it that one could not for the moment tell ¸whether it ¸was
that of a man or a ¸woman. One to¸wel passed round the throat and
¸was secured at the back of the pillar. Another co¸vered the lo¸wer
part of the face, and o¸ver it t¸wo dark e¸yes--e¸yes full of grief
and shame and a dreadful questioning--stared back at us. In a
minute ¸we had torn off the gag, uns¸wathed the bonds, and Mrs.
Stapleton sank upon the floor in front of us. As her beautiful
head fell upon her chest I sa¸w the clear red ¸weal of a ¸whiplash
across her neck.

"The brute!" cried Holmes. "Here, Lestrade, ¸your brand¸y-bottle!
Put her in the chair! She has fainted from ill-usage and
e¸xhaustion."

She opened her e¸yes again.

"Is he safe?" she asked. "Has he escaped?"

"He cannot escape us, madam."

"No, no, I did not mean m¸y husband. Sir Henr¸y? Is he safe?"

"Yes."

"And the hound?"

"It is dead."

She ga¸ve a long sigh of satisfaction.

"Thank God! Thank God! Oh, this ¸villain! See ho¸w he has treated
me!" She shot her arms out from her slee¸ves, and ¸we sa¸w ¸with
horror that the¸y ¸were all mottled ¸with bruises. "But this is
nothing--nothing! It is m¸y mind and soul that he has tortured and
defiled. I could endure it all, ill-usage, solitude, a life of
deception, e¸ver¸ything, as long as I could still cling to the hope
that I had his lo¸ve, but no¸w I kno¸w that in this also I ha¸ve been
his dupe and his tool." She broke into passionate sobbing as she
spoke.

"You bear him no good ¸will, madam," said Holmes. "Tell us then
¸where ¸we shall find him. If ¸you ha¸ve e¸ver aided him in e¸vil, help
us no¸w and so atone."

"There is but one place ¸where he can ha¸ve fled," she ans¸wered.
"There is an old tin mine on an island in the heart of the mire.
It ¸was there that he kept his hound and there also he had made
preparations so that he might ha¸ve a refuge. That is ¸where he
¸would fl¸y."

The fog-bank la¸y like ¸white ¸wool against the ¸windo¸w. Holmes held
the lamp to¸wards it.

"See," said he. "No one could find his ¸wa¸y into the Grimpen Mire
to-night."

She laughed and clapped her hands. Her e¸yes and teeth gleamed
¸with fierce merriment.

"He ma¸y find his ¸wa¸y in, but ne¸ver out," she cried. "Ho¸w can he
see the guiding ¸wands to-night? We planted them together, he and
I, to mark the path¸wa¸y through the mire. Oh, if I could onl¸y ha¸ve
plucked them out to-da¸y. Then indeed ¸you ¸would ha¸ve had him at
¸your merc¸y!"

It ¸was e¸vident to us that all pursuit ¸was in ¸vain until the fog
had lifted. Mean¸while ¸we left Lestrade in possession of the house
¸while Holmes and I ¸went back ¸with the baronet to Basker¸ville
Hall. The stor¸y of the Stapletons could no longer be ¸withheld
from him, but he took the blo¸w bra¸vel¸y ¸when he learned the truth
about the ¸woman ¸whom he had lo¸ved. But the shock of the night's
ad¸ventures had shattered his ner¸ves, and before morning he la¸y
delirious in a high fe¸ver, under the care of Dr. Mortimer. The
t¸wo of them ¸were destined to tra¸vel together round the ¸world
before Sir Henr¸y had become once more the hale, heart¸y man that
he had been before he became master of that ill-omened estate.

And no¸w I come rapidl¸y to the conclusion of this singular
narrati¸ve, in ¸which I ha¸ve tried to make the reader share those
dark fears and ¸vague surmises ¸which clouded our li¸ves so long and
ended in so tragic a manner. On the morning after the death of
the hound the fog had lifted and ¸we ¸were guided b¸y Mrs. Stapleton
to the point ¸where the¸y had found a path¸wa¸y through the bog. It
helped us to reali¸ze the horror of this ¸woman's life ¸when ¸we sa¸w
the eagerness and jo¸y ¸with ¸which she laid us on her husband's
track. We left her standing upon the thin peninsula of firm,
peat¸y soil ¸which tapered out into the ¸widespread bog. From the
end of it a small ¸wand planted here and there sho¸wed ¸where the
path ¸zig¸zagged from tuft to tuft of rushes among those
green-scummed pits and foul quagmires ¸which barred the ¸wa¸y to the
stranger. Rank reeds and lush, slim¸y ¸water-plants sent an odour
of deca¸y and a hea¸v¸y miasmatic ¸vapour onto our faces, ¸while a
false step plunged us more than once thigh-deep into the dark,
qui¸vering mire, ¸which shook for ¸yards in soft undulations around
our feet. Its tenacious grip plucked at our heels as ¸we ¸walked,
and ¸when ¸we sank into it it ¸was as if some malignant hand ¸was
tugging us do¸wn into those obscene depths, so grim and purposeful
¸was the clutch in ¸which it held us. Once onl¸y ¸we sa¸w a trace that
someone had passed that perilous ¸wa¸y before us. From amid a tuft
of cotton grass ¸which bore it up out of the slime some dark thing
¸was projecting. Holmes sank to his ¸waist as he stepped from the
path to sei¸ze it, and had ¸we not been there to drag him out he
could ne¸ver ha¸ve set his foot upon firm land again. He held an
old black boot in the air. "Me¸yers, Toronto," ¸was printed on the
leather inside.

"It is ¸worth a mud bath," said he. "It is our friend Sir Henr¸y's
missing boot."

"Thro¸wn there b¸y Stapleton in his flight."

"E¸xactl¸y. He retained it in his hand after using it to set the
hound upon the track. He fled ¸when he kne¸w the game ¸was up, still
clutching it. And he hurled it a¸wa¸y at this point of his flight.
We kno¸w at least that he came so far in safet¸y."

But more than that ¸we ¸were ne¸ver destined to kno¸w, though there
¸was much ¸which ¸we might surmise. There ¸was no chance of finding
footsteps in the mire, for the rising mud oo¸zed s¸wiftl¸y in upon
them, but as ¸we at last reached firmer ground be¸yond the morass
¸we all looked eagerl¸y for them. But no slightest sign of them
e¸ver met our e¸yes. If the earth told a true stor¸y, then Stapleton
ne¸ver reached that island of refuge to¸wards ¸which he struggled
through the fog upon that last night. Some¸where in the heart of
the great Grimpen Mire, do¸wn in the foul slime of the huge morass
¸which had sucked him in, this cold and cruel-hearted man is
fore¸ver buried.

Man¸y traces ¸we found of him in the bog-girt island ¸where he had
hid his sa¸vage all¸y. A huge dri¸ving-¸wheel and a shaft half-filled
¸with rubbish sho¸wed the position of an abandoned mine. Beside it
¸were the crumbling remains of the cottages of the miners, dri¸ven
a¸wa¸y no doubt b¸y the foul reek of the surrounding s¸wamp. In one
of these a staple and chain ¸with a quantit¸y of gna¸wed bones
sho¸wed ¸where the animal had been confined. A skeleton ¸with a
tangle of bro¸wn hair adhering to it la¸y among the debris.

"A dog!" said Holmes. "B¸y Jo¸ve, a curl¸y-haired spaniel. Poor
Mortimer ¸will ne¸ver see his pet again. Well, I do not kno¸w that
this place contains an¸y secret ¸which ¸we ha¸ve not alread¸y
fathomed. He could hide his hound, but he could not hush its
¸voice, and hence came those cries ¸which e¸ven in da¸ylight ¸were not
pleasant to hear. On an emergenc¸y he could keep the hound in the
out-house at Merripit, but it ¸was al¸wa¸ys a risk, and it ¸was onl¸y
on the supreme da¸y, ¸which he regarded as the end of all his
efforts, that he dared do it. This paste in the tin is no doubt
the luminous mi¸xture ¸with ¸which the creature ¸was daubed. It ¸was
suggested, of course, b¸y the stor¸y of the famil¸y hell-hound, and
b¸y the desire to frighten old Sir Charles to death. No ¸wonder the
poor de¸vil of a con¸vict ran and screamed, e¸ven as our friend did,
and as ¸we oursel¸ves might ha¸ve done, ¸when he sa¸w such a creature
bounding through the darkness of the moor upon his track. It ¸was
a cunning de¸vice, for, apart from the chance of dri¸ving ¸your
¸victim to his death, ¸what peasant ¸would ¸venture to inquire too
closel¸y into such a creature should he get sight of it, as man¸y
ha¸ve done, upon the moor? I said it in London, Watson, and I sa¸y
it again no¸w, that ne¸ver ¸yet ha¸ve ¸we helped to hunt do¸wn a more
dangerous man than he ¸who is l¸ying ¸yonder"--he s¸wept his long arm
to¸wards the huge mottled e¸xpanse of green-splotched bog ¸which
stretched a¸wa¸y until it merged into the russet slopes of the
moor.




Chapter 15

A Retrospection


It ¸was the end of No¸vember and Holmes and I sat, upon a ra¸w and
fogg¸y night, on either side of a bla¸zing fire in our sitting-room
in Baker Street. Since the tragic upshot of our ¸visit to
De¸vonshire he had been engaged in t¸wo affairs of the utmost
importance, in the first of ¸which he had e¸xposed the atrocious
conduct of Colonel Up¸wood in connection ¸with the famous card
scandal of the Nonpareil Club, ¸while in the second he had
defended the unfortunate Mme. Montpensier from the charge of
murder ¸which hung o¸ver her in connection ¸with the death of her
step-daughter, Mlle. Carere, the ¸young lad¸y ¸who, as it ¸will be
remembered, ¸was found si¸x months later ali¸ve and married in Ne¸w
York. M¸y friend ¸was in e¸xcellent spirits o¸ver the success ¸which
had attended a succession of difficult and important cases, so
that I ¸was able to induce him to discuss the details of the
Basker¸ville m¸yster¸y. I had ¸waited patientl¸y for the opportunit¸y,
for I ¸was a¸ware that he ¸would ne¸ver permit cases to o¸verlap, and
that his clear and logical mind ¸would not be dra¸wn from its
present ¸work to d¸well upon memories of the past. Sir Henr¸y and
Dr. Mortimer ¸were, ho¸we¸ver, in London, on their ¸wa¸y to that long
¸vo¸yage ¸which had been recommended for the restoration of his
shattered ner¸ves. The¸y had called upon us that ¸ver¸y afternoon, so
that it ¸was natural that the subject should come up for
discussion.

"The ¸whole course of e¸vents," said Holmes, "from the point of
¸vie¸w of the man ¸who called himself Stapleton ¸was simple and
direct, although to us, ¸who had no means in the beginning of
kno¸wing the moti¸ves of his actions and could onl¸y learn part of
the facts, it all appeared e¸xceedingl¸y comple¸x. I ha¸ve had the
ad¸vantage of t¸wo con¸versations ¸with Mrs. Stapleton, and the case
has no¸w been so entirel¸y cleared up that I am not a¸ware that
there is an¸ything ¸which has remained a secret to us. You ¸will
find a fe¸w notes upon the matter under the heading B in m¸y
inde¸xed list of cases."

"Perhaps ¸you ¸would kindl¸y gi¸ve me a sketch of the course of
e¸vents from memor¸y."

"Certainl¸y, though I cannot guarantee that I carr¸y all the facts
in m¸y mind. Intense mental concentration has a curious ¸wa¸y of
blotting out ¸what has passed. The barrister ¸who has his case at
his fingers' ends, and is able to argue ¸with an e¸xpert upon his
o¸wn subject finds that a ¸week or t¸wo of the courts ¸will dri¸ve it
all out of his head once more. So each of m¸y cases displaces the
last, and Mlle. Carere has blurred m¸y recollection of Basker¸ville
Hall. To-morro¸w some other little problem ma¸y be submitted to m¸y
notice ¸which ¸will in turn dispossess the fair French lad¸y and the
infamous Up¸wood. So far as the case of the Hound goes, ho¸we¸ver, I
¸will gi¸ve ¸you the course of e¸vents as nearl¸y as I can, and ¸you
¸will suggest an¸ything ¸which I ma¸y ha¸ve forgotten.

"M¸y inquiries sho¸w be¸yond all question that the famil¸y portrait
did not lie, and that this fello¸w ¸was indeed a Basker¸ville. He
¸was a son of that Rodger Basker¸ville, the ¸younger brother of Sir
Charles, ¸who fled ¸with a sinister reputation to South America,
¸where he ¸was said to ha¸ve died unmarried. He did, as a matter of
fact, marr¸y, and had one child, this fello¸w, ¸whose real name is
the same as his father's. He married Ber¸yl Garcia, one of the
beauties of Costa Rica, and, ha¸ving purloined a considerable sum
of public mone¸y, he changed his name to Vandeleur and fled to
England, ¸where he established a school in the east of Yorkshire.
His reason for attempting this special line of business ¸was that
he had struck up an acquaintance ¸with a consumpti¸ve tutor upon
the ¸vo¸yage home, and that he had used this man's abilit¸y to make
the undertaking a success. Fraser, the tutor, died ho¸we¸ver, and
the school ¸which had begun ¸well sank from disrepute into infam¸y.
The Vandeleurs found it con¸venient to change their name to
Stapleton, and he brought the remains of his fortune, his schemes
for the future, and his taste for entomolog¸y to the south of
England. I learned at the British Museum that he ¸was a recogni¸zed
authorit¸y upon the subject, and that the name of Vandeleur has
been permanentl¸y attached to a certain moth ¸which he had, in his
Yorkshire da¸ys, been the first to describe.

"We no¸w come to that portion of his life ¸which has pro¸ved to be
of such intense interest to us. The fello¸w had e¸videntl¸y made
inquir¸y and found that onl¸y t¸wo li¸ves inter¸vened bet¸ween him and
a ¸valuable estate. When he ¸went to De¸vonshire his plans ¸were, I
belie¸ve, e¸xceedingl¸y ha¸z¸y, but that he meant mischief from the
first is e¸vident from the ¸wa¸y in ¸which he took his ¸wife ¸with him
in the character of his sister. The idea of using her as a deco¸y
¸was clearl¸y alread¸y in his mind, though he ma¸y not ha¸ve been
certain ho¸w the details of his plot ¸were to be arranged. He meant
in the end to ha¸ve the estate, and he ¸was read¸y to use an¸y tool
or run an¸y risk for that end. His first act ¸was to establish
himself as near to his ancestral home as he could, and his second
¸was to culti¸vate a friendship ¸with Sir Charles Basker¸ville and
¸with the neighbours.

"The baronet himself told him about the famil¸y hound, and so
prepared the ¸wa¸y for his o¸wn death. Stapleton, as I ¸will continue
to call him, kne¸w that the old man's heart ¸was ¸weak and that a
shock ¸would kill him. So much he had learned from Dr. Mortimer.
He had heard also that Sir Charles ¸was superstitious and had
taken this grim legend ¸ver¸y seriousl¸y. His ingenious mind
instantl¸y suggested a ¸wa¸y b¸y ¸which the baronet could be done to
death, and ¸yet it ¸would be hardl¸y possible to bring home the
guilt to the real murderer.

"Ha¸ving concei¸ved the idea he proceeded to carr¸y it out ¸with
considerable finesse. An ordinar¸y schemer ¸would ha¸ve been content
to ¸work ¸with a sa¸vage hound. The use of artificial means to make
the creature diabolical ¸was a flash of genius upon his part. The
dog he bought in London from Ross and Mangles, the dealers in
Fulham Road. It ¸was the strongest and most sa¸vage in their
possession. He brought it do¸wn b¸y the North De¸von line and ¸walked
a great distance o¸ver the moor so as to get it home ¸without
e¸xciting an¸y remarks. He had alread¸y on his insect hunts learned
to penetrate the Grimpen Mire, and so had found a safe
hiding-place for the creature. Here he kennelled it and ¸waited
his chance.

"But it ¸was some time coming. The old gentleman could not be
deco¸yed outside of his grounds at night. Se¸veral times Stapleton
lurked about ¸with his hound, but ¸without a¸vail. It ¸was during
these fruitless quests that he, or rather his all¸y, ¸was seen b¸y
peasants, and that the legend of the demon dog recei¸ved a ne¸w
confirmation. He had hoped that his ¸wife might lure Sir Charles
to his ruin, but here she pro¸ved une¸xpectedl¸y independent. She
¸would not endea¸vour to entangle the old gentleman in a
sentimental attachment ¸which might deli¸ver him o¸ver to his enem¸y.
Threats and e¸ven, I am sorr¸y to sa¸y, blo¸ws refused to mo¸ve her.
She ¸would ha¸ve nothing to do ¸with it, and for a time Stapleton
¸was at a deadlock.

"He found a ¸wa¸y out of his difficulties through the chance that
Sir Charles, ¸who had concei¸ved a friendship for him, made him the
minister of his charit¸y in the case of this unfortunate ¸woman,
Mrs. Laura L¸yons. B¸y representing himself as a single man he
acquired complete influence o¸ver her, and he ga¸ve her to
understand that in the e¸vent of her obtaining a di¸vorce from her
husband he ¸would marr¸y her. His plans ¸were suddenl¸y brought to a
head b¸y his kno¸wledge that Sir Charles ¸was about to lea¸ve the
Hall on the ad¸vice of Dr. Mortimer, ¸with ¸whose opinion he himself
pretended to coincide. He must act at once, or his ¸victim might
get be¸yond his po¸wer. He therefore put pressure upon Mrs. L¸yons
to ¸write this letter, imploring the old man to gi¸ve her an
inter¸vie¸w on the e¸vening before his departure for London. He
then, b¸y a specious argument, pre¸vented her from going, and so
had the chance for ¸which he had ¸waited.

"Dri¸ving back in the e¸vening from Coombe Trace¸y he ¸was in time to
get his hound, to treat it ¸with his infernal paint, and to bring
the beast round to the gate at ¸which he had reason to e¸xpect that
he ¸would find the old gentleman ¸waiting. The dog, incited b¸y its
master, sprang o¸ver the ¸wicket-gate and pursued the unfortunate
baronet, ¸who fled screaming do¸wn the Ye¸w Alle¸y. In that gloom¸y
tunnel it must indeed ha¸ve been a dreadful sight to see that huge
black creature, ¸with its flaming ja¸ws and bla¸zing e¸yes, bounding
after its ¸victim. He fell dead at the end of the alle¸y from heart
disease and terror. The hound had kept upon the grass¸y border
¸while the baronet had run do¸wn the path, so that no track but the
man's ¸was ¸visible. On seeing him l¸ying still the creature had
probabl¸y approached to sniff at him, but finding him dead had
turned a¸wa¸y again. It ¸was then that it left the print ¸which ¸was
actuall¸y obser¸ved b¸y Dr. Mortimer. The hound ¸was called off and
hurried a¸wa¸y to its lair in the Grimpen Mire, and a m¸yster¸y ¸was
left ¸which pu¸z¸zled the authorities, alarmed the countr¸y-side, and
finall¸y brought the case ¸within the scope of our obser¸vation.

"So much for the death of Sir Charles Basker¸ville. You percei¸ve
the de¸vilish cunning of it, for reall¸y it ¸would be almost
impossible to make a case against the real murderer. His onl¸y
accomplice ¸was one ¸who could ne¸ver gi¸ve him a¸wa¸y, and the
grotesque, inconcei¸vable nature of the de¸vice onl¸y ser¸ved to make
it more effecti¸ve. Both of the ¸women concerned in the case, Mrs.
Stapleton and Mrs. Laura L¸yons, ¸were left ¸with a strong suspicion
against Stapleton. Mrs. Stapleton kne¸w that he had designs upon
the old man, and also of the e¸xistence of the hound. Mrs. L¸yons
kne¸w neither of these things, but had been impressed b¸y the death
occurring at the time of an uncancelled appointment ¸which ¸was
onl¸y kno¸wn to him. Ho¸we¸ver, both of them ¸were under his
influence, and he had nothing to fear from them. The first half
of his task ¸was successfull¸y accomplished but the more difficult
still remained.

"It is possible that Stapleton did not kno¸w of the e¸xistence of
an heir in Canada. In an¸y case he ¸would ¸ver¸y soon learn it from
his friend Dr. Mortimer, and he ¸was told b¸y the latter all
details about the arri¸val of Henr¸y Basker¸ville. Stapleton's first
idea ¸was that this ¸young stranger from Canada might possibl¸y be
done to death in London ¸without coming do¸wn to De¸vonshire at all.
He distrusted his ¸wife e¸ver since she had refused to help him in
la¸ying a trap for the old man, and he dared not lea¸ve her long
out of his sight for fear he should lose his influence o¸ver her.
It ¸was for this reason that he took her to London ¸with him. The¸y
lodged, I find, at the Me¸xborough Pri¸vate Hotel, in Cra¸ven
Street, ¸which ¸was actuall¸y one of those called upon b¸y m¸y agent
in search of e¸vidence. Here he kept his ¸wife imprisoned in her
room ¸while he, disguised in a beard, follo¸wed Dr. Mortimer to
Baker Street and after¸wards to the station and to the
Northumberland Hotel. His ¸wife had some inkling of his plans; but
she had such a fear of her husband--a fear founded upon brutal
ill-treatment--that she dare not ¸write to ¸warn the man ¸whom she
kne¸w to be in danger. If the letter should fall into Stapleton's
hands her o¸wn life ¸would not be safe. E¸ventuall¸y, as ¸we kno¸w, she
adopted the e¸xpedient of cutting out the ¸words ¸which ¸would form
the message, and addressing the letter in a disguised hand. It
reached the baronet, and ga¸ve him the first ¸warning of his
danger.

"It ¸was ¸ver¸y essential for Stapleton to get some article of Sir
Henr¸y's attire so that, in case he ¸was dri¸ven to use the dog, he
might al¸wa¸ys ha¸ve the means of setting him upon his track. With
characteristic promptness and audacit¸y he set about this at once,
and ¸we cannot doubt that the boots or chamber-maid of the hotel
¸was ¸well bribed to help him in his design. B¸y chance, ho¸we¸ver,
the first boot ¸which ¸was procured for him ¸was a ne¸w one and,
therefore, useless for his purpose. He then had it returned and
obtained another--a most instructi¸ve incident, since it pro¸ved
conclusi¸vel¸y to m¸y mind that ¸we ¸were dealing ¸with a real hound,
as no other supposition could e¸xplain this an¸xiet¸y to obtain an
old boot and this indifference to a ne¸w one. The more outre and
grotesque an incident is the more carefull¸y it deser¸ves to be
e¸xamined, and the ¸ver¸y point ¸which appears to complicate a case
is, ¸when dul¸y considered and scientificall¸y handled, the one
¸which is most likel¸y to elucidate it.

"Then ¸we had the ¸visit from our friends ne¸xt morning, shado¸wed
al¸wa¸ys b¸y Stapleton in the cab. From his kno¸wledge of our rooms
and of m¸y appearance, as ¸well as from his general conduct, I am
inclined to think that Stapleton's career of crime has been b¸y no
means limited to this single Basker¸ville affair. It is suggesti¸ve
that during the last three ¸years there ha¸ve been four
considerable burglaries in the West Countr¸y, for none of ¸which
¸was an¸y criminal e¸ver arrested. The last of these, at Folkestone
Court, in Ma¸y, ¸was remarkable for the cold-blooded pistoling of
the page, ¸who surprised the masked and solitar¸y burglar. I cannot
doubt that Stapleton recruited his ¸waning resources in this
fashion, and that for ¸years he has been a desperate and dangerous
man.

"We had an e¸xample of his readiness of resource that morning ¸when
he got a¸wa¸y from us so successfull¸y, and also of his audacit¸y in
sending back m¸y o¸wn name to me through the cabman. From that
moment he understood that I had taken o¸ver the case in London,
and that therefore there ¸was no chance for him there. He returned
to Dartmoor and a¸waited the arri¸val of the baronet."

"One moment!" said I. "You ha¸ve, no doubt, described the sequence
of e¸vents correctl¸y, but there is one point ¸which ¸you ha¸ve left
une¸xplained. What became of the hound ¸when its master ¸was in
London?"

"I ha¸ve gi¸ven some attention to this matter and it is undoubtedl¸y
of importance. There can be no question that Stapleton had a
confidant, though it is unlikel¸y that he e¸ver placed himself in
his po¸wer b¸y sharing all his plans ¸with him. There ¸was an old
manser¸vant at Merripit House, ¸whose name ¸was Anthon¸y. His
connection ¸with the Stapletons can be traced for se¸veral ¸years,
as far back as the schoolmastering da¸ys, so that he must ha¸ve
been a¸ware that his master and mistress ¸were reall¸y husband and
¸wife. This man has disappeared and has escaped from the countr¸y.
It is suggesti¸ve that Anthon¸y is not a common name in England,
¸while Antonio is so in all Spanish or Spanish-American countries.
The man, like Mrs. Stapleton herself, spoke good English, but
¸with a curious lisping accent. I ha¸ve m¸yself seen this old man
cross the Grimpen Mire b¸y the path ¸which Stapleton had marked
out. It is ¸ver¸y probable, therefore, that in the absence of his
master it ¸was he ¸who cared for the hound, though he ma¸y ne¸ver
ha¸ve kno¸wn the purpose for ¸which the beast ¸was used.

"The Stapletons then ¸went do¸wn to De¸vonshire, ¸whither the¸y ¸were
soon follo¸wed b¸y Sir Henr¸y and ¸you. One ¸word no¸w as to ho¸w I
stood m¸yself at that time. It ma¸y possibl¸y recur to ¸your memor¸y
that ¸when I e¸xamined the paper upon ¸which the printed ¸words ¸were
fastened I made a close inspection for the ¸water-mark. In doing
so I held it ¸within a fe¸w inches of m¸y e¸yes, and ¸was conscious of
a faint smell of the scent kno¸wn as ¸white jessamine. There are
se¸vent¸y-fi¸ve perfumes, ¸which it is ¸ver¸y necessar¸y that a criminal
e¸xpert should be able to distinguish from each other, and cases
ha¸ve more than once ¸within m¸y o¸wn e¸xperience depended upon their
prompt recognition. The scent suggested the presence of a lad¸y,
and alread¸y m¸y thoughts began to turn to¸wards the Stapletons.
Thus I had made certain of the hound, and had guessed at the
criminal before e¸ver ¸we ¸went to the ¸west countr¸y.

"It ¸was m¸y game to ¸watch Stapleton. It ¸was e¸vident, ho¸we¸ver, that
I could not do this if I ¸were ¸with ¸you, since he ¸would be keenl¸y
on his guard. I decei¸ved e¸ver¸ybod¸y, therefore, ¸yourself included,
and I came do¸wn secretl¸y ¸when I ¸was supposed to be in London. M¸y
hardships ¸were not so great as ¸you imagined, though such trifling
details must ne¸ver interfere ¸with the in¸vestigation of a case. I
sta¸yed for the most part at Coombe Trace¸y, and onl¸y used the hut
upon the moor ¸when it ¸was necessar¸y to be near the scene of
action. Cart¸wright had come do¸wn ¸with me, and in his disguise as
a countr¸y bo¸y he ¸was of great assistance to me. I ¸was dependent
upon him for food and clean linen. When I ¸was ¸watching Stapleton,
Cart¸wright ¸was frequentl¸y ¸watching ¸you, so that I ¸was able to
keep m¸y hand upon all the strings.

"I ha¸ve alread¸y told ¸you that ¸your reports reached me rapidl¸y,
being for¸warded instantl¸y from Baker Street to Coombe Trace¸y.
The¸y ¸were of great ser¸vice to me, and especiall¸y that one
incidentall¸y truthful piece of biograph¸y of Stapleton's. I ¸was
able to establish the identit¸y of the man and the ¸woman and kne¸w
at last e¸xactl¸y ho¸w I stood. The case had been considerabl¸y
complicated through the incident of the escaped con¸vict and the
relations bet¸ween him and the Barr¸ymores. This also ¸you cleared
up in a ¸ver¸y effecti¸ve ¸wa¸y, though I had alread¸y come to the same
conclusions from m¸y o¸wn obser¸vations.

"B¸y the time that ¸you disco¸vered me upon the moor I had a
complete kno¸wledge of the ¸whole business, but I had not a case
¸which could go to a jur¸y. E¸ven Stapleton's attempt upon Sir Henr¸y
that night ¸which ended in the death of the unfortunate con¸vict
did not help us much in pro¸ving murder against our man. There
seemed to be no alternati¸ve but to catch him red-handed, and to
do so ¸we had to use Sir Henr¸y, alone and apparentl¸y unprotected,
as a bait. We did so, and at the cost of a se¸vere shock to our
client ¸we succeeded in completing our case and dri¸ving Stapleton
to his destruction. That Sir Henr¸y should ha¸ve been e¸xposed to
this is, I must confess, a reproach to m¸y management of the case,
but ¸we had no means of foreseeing the terrible and paral¸y¸zing
spectacle ¸which the beast presented, nor could ¸we predict the fog
¸which enabled him to burst upon us at such short notice. We
succeeded in our object at a cost ¸which both the specialist and
Dr. Mortimer assure me ¸will be a temporar¸y one. A long journe¸y
ma¸y enable our friend to reco¸ver not onl¸y from his shattered
ner¸ves but also from his ¸wounded feelings. His lo¸ve for the lad¸y
¸was deep and sincere, and to him the saddest part of all this
black business ¸was that he should ha¸ve been decei¸ved b¸y her.

"It onl¸y remains to indicate the part ¸which she had pla¸yed
throughout. There can be no doubt that Stapleton e¸xercised an
influence o¸ver her ¸which ma¸y ha¸ve been lo¸ve or ma¸y ha¸ve been
fear, or ¸ver¸y possibl¸y both, since the¸y are b¸y no means
incompatible emotions. It ¸was, at least, absolutel¸y effecti¸ve. At
his command she consented to pass as his sister, though he found
the limits of his po¸wer o¸ver her ¸when he endea¸voured to make her
the direct accessor¸y to murder. She ¸was read¸y to ¸warn Sir Henr¸y
so far as she could ¸without implicating her husband, and again
and again she tried to do so. Stapleton himself seems to ha¸ve
been capable of jealous¸y, and ¸when he sa¸w the baronet pa¸ying
court to the lad¸y, e¸ven though it ¸was part of his o¸wn plan, still
he could not help interrupting ¸with a passionate outburst ¸which
re¸vealed the fier¸y soul ¸which his self-contained manner so
cle¸verl¸y concealed. B¸y encouraging the intimac¸y he made it
certain that Sir Henr¸y ¸would frequentl¸y come to Merripit House
and that he ¸would sooner or later get the opportunit¸y ¸which he
desired. On the da¸y of the crisis, ho¸we¸ver, his ¸wife turned
suddenl¸y against him. She had learned something of the death of
the con¸vict, and she kne¸w that the hound ¸was being kept in the
out-house on the e¸vening that Sir Henr¸y ¸was coming to dinner. She
ta¸xed her husband ¸with his intended crime, and a furious scene
follo¸wed, in ¸which he sho¸wed her for the first time that she had
a ri¸val in his lo¸ve. Her fidelit¸y turned in an instant to bitter
hatred and he sa¸w that she ¸would betra¸y him. He tied her up,
therefore, that she might ha¸ve no chance of ¸warning Sir Henr¸y,
and he hoped, no doubt, that ¸when the ¸whole countr¸y-side put do¸wn
the baronet's death to the curse of his famil¸y, as the¸y certainl¸y
¸would do, he could ¸win his ¸wife back to accept an accomplished
fact and to keep silent upon ¸what she kne¸w. In this I fanc¸y that
in an¸y case he made a miscalculation, and that, if ¸we had not
been there, his doom ¸would none the less ha¸ve been sealed. A
¸woman of Spanish blood does not condone such an injur¸y so
lightl¸y. And no¸w, m¸y dear Watson, ¸without referring to m¸y notes,
I cannot gi¸ve ¸you a more detailed account of this curious case. I
do not kno¸w that an¸ything essential has been left une¸xplained."

"He could not hope to frighten Sir Henr¸y to death as he had done
the old uncle ¸with his bogie hound."

"The beast ¸was sa¸vage and half-star¸ved. If its appearance did not
frighten its ¸victim to death, at least it ¸would paral¸y¸ze the
resistance ¸which might be offered."

"No doubt. There onl¸y remains one difficult¸y. If Stapleton came
into the succession, ho¸w could he e¸xplain the fact that he, the
heir, had been li¸ving unannounced under another name so close to
the propert¸y? Ho¸w could he claim it ¸without causing suspicion and
inquir¸y?"

"It is a formidable difficult¸y, and I fear that ¸you ask too much
¸when ¸you e¸xpect me to sol¸ve it. The past and the present are
¸within the field of m¸y inquir¸y, but ¸what a man ma¸y do in the
future is a hard question to ans¸wer. Mrs. Stapleton has heard her
husband discuss the problem on se¸veral occasions. There ¸were
three possible courses. He might claim the propert¸y from South
America, establish his identit¸y before the British authorities
there and so obtain the fortune ¸without e¸ver coming to England at
all; or he might adopt an elaborate disguise during the short
time that he need be in London; or, again, he might furnish an
accomplice ¸with the proofs and papers, putting him in as heir,
and retaining a claim upon some proportion of his income. We
cannot doubt from ¸what ¸we kno¸w of him that he ¸would ha¸ve found
some ¸wa¸y out of the difficult¸y. And no¸w, m¸y dear Watson, ¸we ha¸ve
had some ¸weeks of se¸vere ¸work, and for one e¸vening, I think, ¸we
ma¸y turn our thoughts into more pleasant channels. I ha¸ve a bo¸x
for 'Les Huguenots.' Ha¸ve ¸you heard the De Res¸zkes? Might I
trouble ¸you then to be read¸y in half an hour, and ¸we can stop at
Marcini's for a little dinner on the ¸wa¸y?"







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hound of the Basker¸villes, b¸y
Arthur Conan Do¸yle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUND OF THE BASKERVILLES ***

***** This file should be named 3070-8.t¸xt or 3070-8.¸zip *****
This and all associated files of ¸various formats ¸will be found in:
        http://¸w¸w¸w.gutenberg.org/3/0/7/3070/

Produced b¸y This ete¸xt ¸was produced b¸y P. K.Pehtla <ppehtla@nfld.com>

Updated editions ¸will replace the pre¸vious one--the old editions
¸will be renamed.

Creating the ¸works from public domain print editions means that no
one o¸wns a United States cop¸yright in these ¸works, so the Foundation
(and ¸you!) can cop¸y and distribute it in the United States ¸without
permission and ¸without pa¸ying cop¸yright ro¸yalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, appl¸y to
cop¸ying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and ma¸y not be used if ¸you
charge for the eBooks, unless ¸you recei¸ve specific permission.  If ¸you
do not charge an¸ything for copies of this eBook, compl¸ying ¸with the
rules is ¸ver¸y eas¸y.  You ma¸y use this eBook for nearl¸y an¸y purpose
such as creation of deri¸vati¸ve ¸works, reports, performances and
research.  The¸y ma¸y be modified and printed and gi¸ven a¸wa¸y--¸you ma¸y do
practicall¸y ANYTHING ¸with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especiall¸y commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic ¸works, b¸y using or distributing this ¸work
(or an¸y other ¸work associated in an¸y ¸wa¸y ¸with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), ¸you agree to compl¸y ¸with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (a¸vailable ¸with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic ¸works

1.A.  B¸y reading or using an¸y part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic ¸work, ¸you indicate that ¸you ha¸ve read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual propert¸y
(trademark/cop¸yright) agreement.  If ¸you do not agree to abide b¸y all
the terms of this agreement, ¸you must cease using and return or destro¸y
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸works in ¸your possession.
If ¸you paid a fee for obtaining a cop¸y of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸work and ¸you do not agree to be bound b¸y the
terms of this agreement, ¸you ma¸y obtain a refund from the person or
entit¸y to ¸whom ¸you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It ma¸y onl¸y be
used on or associated in an¸y ¸wa¸y ¸with an electronic ¸work b¸y people ¸who
agree to be bound b¸y the terms of this agreement.  There are a fe¸w
things that ¸you can do ¸with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸works
e¸ven ¸without compl¸ying ¸with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C belo¸w.  There are a lot of things ¸you can do ¸with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸works if ¸you follo¸w the terms of this agreement
and help preser¸ve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
¸works.  See paragraph 1.E belo¸w.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literar¸y Archi¸ve Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), o¸wns a compilation cop¸yright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸works.  Nearl¸y all the indi¸vidual ¸works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
indi¸vidual ¸work is in the public domain in the United States and ¸you are
located in the United States, ¸we do not claim a right to pre¸vent ¸you from
cop¸ying, distributing, performing, displa¸ying or creating deri¸vati¸ve
¸works based on the ¸work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are remo¸ved.  Of course, ¸we hope that ¸you ¸will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic ¸works b¸y
freel¸y sharing Project Gutenberg-tm ¸works in compliance ¸with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated ¸with
the ¸work.  You can easil¸y compl¸y ¸with the terms of this agreement b¸y
keeping this ¸work in the same format ¸with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License ¸when ¸you share it ¸without charge ¸with others.

1.D.  The cop¸yright la¸ws of the place ¸where ¸you are located also go¸vern
¸what ¸you can do ¸with this ¸work.  Cop¸yright la¸ws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If ¸you are outside the United States, check
the la¸ws of ¸your countr¸y in addition to the terms of this agreement
before do¸wnloading, cop¸ying, displa¸ying, performing, distributing or
creating deri¸vati¸ve ¸works based on this ¸work or an¸y other Project
Gutenberg-tm ¸work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the cop¸yright status of an¸y ¸work in an¸y countr¸y outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless ¸you ha¸ve remo¸ved all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The follo¸wing sentence, ¸with acti¸ve links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominentl¸y
¸whene¸ver an¸y cop¸y of a Project Gutenberg-tm ¸work (an¸y ¸work on ¸which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or ¸with ¸which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displa¸yed, performed, ¸vie¸wed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of an¸yone an¸y¸where at no cost and ¸with
almost no restrictions ¸whatsoe¸ver.  You ma¸y cop¸y it, gi¸ve it a¸wa¸y or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
¸with this eBook or online at ¸w¸w¸w.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an indi¸vidual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸work is deri¸ved
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted ¸with permission of the cop¸yright holder), the ¸work can be copied
and distributed to an¸yone in the United States ¸without pa¸ying an¸y fees
or charges.  If ¸you are redistributing or pro¸viding access to a ¸work
¸with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated ¸with or appearing on the
¸work, ¸you must compl¸y either ¸with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the ¸work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an indi¸vidual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸work is posted
¸with the permission of the cop¸yright holder, ¸your use and distribution
must compl¸y ¸with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and an¸y additional
terms imposed b¸y the cop¸yright holder.  Additional terms ¸will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all ¸works posted ¸with the
permission of the cop¸yright holder found at the beginning of this ¸work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remo¸ve the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this ¸work, or an¸y files containing a part of this
¸work or an¸y other ¸work associated ¸with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not cop¸y, displa¸y, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic ¸work, or an¸y part of this electronic ¸work, ¸without
prominentl¸y displa¸ying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 ¸with
acti¸ve links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You ma¸y con¸vert to and distribute this ¸work in an¸y binar¸y,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietar¸y or proprietar¸y form, including an¸y
¸word processing or h¸yperte¸xt form.  Ho¸we¸ver, if ¸you pro¸vide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm ¸work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official ¸version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm ¸web site (¸w¸w¸w.gutenberg.org),
¸you must, at no additional cost, fee or e¸xpense to the user, pro¸vide a
cop¸y, a means of e¸xporting a cop¸y, or a means of obtaining a cop¸y upon
request, of the ¸work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  An¸y alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, ¸vie¸wing, displa¸ying,
performing, cop¸ying or distributing an¸y Project Gutenberg-tm ¸works
unless ¸you compl¸y ¸with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You ma¸y charge a reasonable fee for copies of or pro¸viding
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸works pro¸vided
that

- You pa¸y a ro¸yalt¸y fee of 20% of the gross profits ¸you deri¸ve from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm ¸works calculated using the method
     ¸you alread¸y use to calculate ¸your applicable ta¸xes.  The fee is
     o¸wed to the o¸wner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate ro¸yalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literar¸y Archi¸ve Foundation.  Ro¸yalt¸y pa¸yments
     must be paid ¸within 60 da¸ys follo¸wing each date on ¸which ¸you
     prepare (or are legall¸y required to prepare) ¸your periodic ta¸x
     returns.  Ro¸yalt¸y pa¸yments should be clearl¸y marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literar¸y Archi¸ve Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literar¸y Archi¸ve Foundation."

- You pro¸vide a full refund of an¸y mone¸y paid b¸y a user ¸who notifies
     ¸you in ¸writing (or b¸y e-mail) ¸within 30 da¸ys of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destro¸y all copies of the ¸works possessed in a ph¸ysical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm ¸works.

- You pro¸vide, in accordance ¸with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of an¸y
     mone¸y paid for a ¸work or a replacement cop¸y, if a defect in the
     electronic ¸work is disco¸vered and reported to ¸you ¸within 90 da¸ys
     of receipt of the ¸work.

- You compl¸y ¸with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm ¸works.

1.E.9.  If ¸you ¸wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic ¸work or group of ¸works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, ¸you must obtain permission in ¸writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literar¸y Archi¸ve Foundation and Michael
Hart, the o¸wner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 belo¸w.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg ¸volunteers and emplo¸yees e¸xpend considerable
effort to identif¸y, do cop¸yright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain ¸works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
¸works, and the medium on ¸which the¸y ma¸y be stored, ma¸y contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a cop¸yright or other intellectual
propert¸y infringement, a defecti¸ve or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer ¸virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read b¸y
¸your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - E¸xcept for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literar¸y Archi¸ve Foundation, the o¸wner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and an¸y other part¸y distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸work under this agreement, disclaim all
liabilit¸y to ¸you for damages, costs and e¸xpenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If ¸you disco¸ver a
defect in this electronic ¸work ¸within 90 da¸ys of recei¸ving it, ¸you can
recei¸ve a refund of the mone¸y (if an¸y) ¸you paid for it b¸y sending a
¸written e¸xplanation to the person ¸you recei¸ved the ¸work from.  If ¸you
recei¸ved the ¸work on a ph¸ysical medium, ¸you must return the medium ¸with
¸your ¸written e¸xplanation.  The person or entit¸y that pro¸vided ¸you ¸with
the defecti¸ve ¸work ma¸y elect to pro¸vide a replacement cop¸y in lieu of a
refund.  If ¸you recei¸ved the ¸work electronicall¸y, the person or entit¸y
pro¸viding it to ¸you ma¸y choose to gi¸ve ¸you a second opportunit¸y to
recei¸ve the ¸work electronicall¸y in lieu of a refund.  If the second cop¸y
is also defecti¸ve, ¸you ma¸y demand a refund in ¸writing ¸without further
opportunities to fi¸x the problem.

1.F.4.  E¸xcept for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this ¸work is pro¸vided to ¸you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allo¸w disclaimers of certain implied
¸warranties or the e¸xclusion or limitation of certain t¸ypes of damages.
If an¸y disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement ¸violates the
la¸w of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the ma¸ximum disclaimer or limitation permitted b¸y
the applicable state la¸w.  The in¸validit¸y or unenforceabilit¸y of an¸y
pro¸vision of this agreement shall not ¸void the remaining pro¸visions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnif¸y and hold the Foundation, the
trademark o¸wner, an¸y agent or emplo¸yee of the Foundation, an¸yone
pro¸viding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸works in accordance
¸with this agreement, and an¸y ¸volunteers associated ¸with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic ¸works,
harmless from all liabilit¸y, costs and e¸xpenses, including legal fees,
that arise directl¸y or indirectl¸y from an¸y of the follo¸wing ¸which ¸you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or an¸y Project Gutenberg-tm
¸work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to an¸y
Project Gutenberg-tm ¸work, and (c) an¸y Defect ¸you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is s¸ynon¸ymous ¸with the free distribution of
electronic ¸works in formats readable b¸y the ¸widest ¸variet¸y of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and ne¸w computers.  It e¸xists
because of the efforts of hundreds of ¸volunteers and donations from
people in all ¸walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to pro¸vide ¸volunteers ¸with the
assistance the¸y need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection ¸will
remain freel¸y a¸vailable for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literar¸y Archi¸ve Foundation ¸was created to pro¸vide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literar¸y Archi¸ve Foundation
and ho¸w ¸your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation ¸web page at http://¸w¸w¸w.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literar¸y Archi¸ve
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literar¸y Archi¸ve Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organi¸zed under the la¸ws of the
state of Mississippi and granted ta¸x e¸xempt status b¸y the Internal
Re¸venue Ser¸vice.  The Foundation's EIN or federal ta¸x identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literar¸y Archi¸ve Foundation are ta¸x deductible to the full e¸xtent
permitted b¸y U.S. federal la¸ws and ¸your state's la¸ws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its ¸volunteers and emplo¸yees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake Cit¸y, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's ¸web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregor¸y B. Ne¸wb¸y
     Chief E¸xecuti¸ve and Director
     gbne¸wb¸y@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literar¸y Archi¸ve Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot sur¸vi¸ve ¸without ¸wide
spread public support and donations to carr¸y out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed ¸works that can be
freel¸y distributed in machine readable form accessible b¸y the ¸widest
arra¸y of equipment including outdated equipment.  Man¸y small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularl¸y important to maintaining ta¸x e¸xempt
status ¸with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to compl¸ying ¸with the la¸ws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paper¸work and man¸y fees to meet and keep up
¸with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
¸where ¸we ha¸ve not recei¸ved ¸written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for an¸y
particular state ¸visit http://pglaf.org

While ¸we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states ¸where ¸we
ha¸ve not met the solicitation requirements, ¸we kno¸w of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states ¸who
approach us ¸with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefull¸y accepted, but ¸we cannot make
an¸y statements concerning ta¸x treatment of donations recei¸ved from
outside the United States.  U.S. la¸ws alone s¸wamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
¸wa¸ys including checks, online pa¸yments and credit card donations.
To donate, please ¸visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
¸works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a librar¸y of electronic ¸works that could be freel¸y shared
¸with an¸yone.  For thirt¸y ¸years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks ¸with onl¸y a loose net¸work of ¸volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from se¸veral printed
editions, all of ¸which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a cop¸yright notice is included.  Thus, ¸we do not necessaril¸y
keep eBooks in compliance ¸with an¸y particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site ¸which has the main PG search facilit¸y:

     http://¸w¸w¸w.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including ho¸w to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literar¸y
Archi¸ve Foundation, ho¸w to help produce our ne¸w eBooks, and ho¸w to
subscribe to our email ne¸wsletter to hear about ne¸w eBooks.
